# 11. Community Detection and Online Graph Algorithms

## Community Detection

Goal: find densely linked clusters.

### Strength of Weak Ties

If the number of hops between two nodes is large, the connection is likely to be a weak tie.

Edge betweenness: number of shortest paths that contain that edge (one pair of nodes may have multiple shortest paths).


### Girvan-Newman

Find the link with the highest betweenness factor and remove it.

By repeating, the network can be decomposed in a hierarchical manner.

#### Computing Betweenness

Pick starting node $A$ and run a breadth first search, computing the number of shortest paths from $A$ to every other node.

This can be done by summing the values of the node's parents. Set the root node, $A$, to have a value of $1$.

Store information about links *between edges on the same level* (hops from $A$).

```
      a  ----
    / | \    \
   /  |  \    \
 b1 - c1  d1   e1   level 1 (1 hop from a)
  \  /    / \  /
   \/    /   \/
   f2   g1   h2     level 2
    \   /\   /
     \ /  \ /
      i3   j3       level 3
       \  /
        \/
        k6          level 4
```

Then, compute betweenness by working up the tree using BFS following these rules:

- Each leaf node has a node flow of $1$
- Each node gives splits its node flow among its parents:
  - For each edge going to its children, the betweenness value is proportional to the node flow of the parent
  - e.g. If node $C$ has a flow of $1.5$ and it has two parents, $A$ and $B$ with node flows of $1$ and $2$ respectively, $AB = 0.5$ and $AC = 1$
- Each node also gives node flow to its parents; each parent gets some of its node flow proportional to the value (number of shortest paths) of the parent
- All other nodes have a node flow of $1$ plus the sum of node flow  children (or rather, from the edges connecting it to its children)

For example, $i$ and $j$ have the same node weight, so $k$'s node flow, $1$, is divided equally; $ij = 0.5$; $jk = 0.5$.

$j$ has a node flow of $1 + 0.5 = 1.5$; the ratio of $g$ to $h$ is $1:2$, so $gj = 0.5$ and $hj = 1$.


Hence, the resultant graph is:

```
      a  ----
   2/2| \4  2\
   /  |  \    \
2b - 2c  4d   2e
 1\ 1/   2/ \1 /1
   \/    /   \/
   2f  2g    2h
   1\ .5/\.5 /1
     \ /  \ /
   1.5i  1.5j
       \  /
     0.5\/0.5
        1k        
```

This must be repeated, picking every node as the root node. The betweenness value for each edge can be summed and then divided by 2 (as each shortest path discovered twice from each end).

## Network Communities

Community detection requires not just computing betweenness, but also determining when to stop dividing clusters; otherwise, each cluster would be left with a single node.

**Network communities** are sets of tightly connected nodes.

<!--
Edges that link two communities, and how strongly an edge is within a community TODO lecture

What defines a community: does the output of the algorithm match our intuitive sense of what a community is?
--->

### Modularity

$Q$ is a measure of how well a network is partitioned.

If a network is partitioned into groups, $s \in S$:

$$
Q \propto \sum_{s \in S}{\textrm{number of edges in } s - \textrm{expected number of edges in } s}
$$

But how is the number of expected edges found?

#### Null Model

Given a real $G$ on $n$ nodes and $m$ edges, we construct a rewired network $G'$, a multigraph.

If $k_n$ is the degree of node $n$, the expected number of edges between nodes $i$ and $j$ is 

$$
\frac{k_i k_j}{2m}
$$

(sum of degrees of all nodes is twice the number of edges)

The expected number of edges in the multigraph $G'$ is

$$
\begin{align}
&= \frac{1}{2} \sum_{i \in N}{\sum_{j \in N}{\frac{k_i k_j}{2m}}} \\
&= \frac{1}{4m} \sum_{i \in N}{k_i \sum_{j \in N}{k_j}} \\
&= \frac{4m^2}{4m} \\
&= m
\end{align}
$$

If you look at the entire graph, there is a distribution of degrees. Count total number of degrees and divide by two times the number of nodes; this is the expected number of edges per node. Expect the subgroup to have the same amount.

Given a partitioning $S$ of graph $G$:
$$
Q(G, S) = \frac{1}{2m} \sum_{s\in S}{\sum_{i \in s}{\sum_{j\in s}{A_{ij} - \frac{k_i k_j}{2m}}}}
$$
Where $A_{ij} = 1$ if there is a edge $i \rightarrow j$, and $0$ otherwise.

$Q$ is normalized such that $-1 \lt Q \lt 1$. 

A positive value means the number of edges within the groups exceeds the expected number.

If $0.3 \ge Q \ge 0.7$ means significant community structure in most graphs.

Modularity is 0 initially; with only one community, no edges have been removed. In nice cases, there will be an inflection point at which maximum modularity is reached.
