# 02. Scrum 101

## Scrum Values

- Openness to feedback and ideas
- Focus; avoid distractions
- Respect others, even when things go wrong
- Courage to take risks and fail
- Commitment to the team and project

## Lifecycle

Sprints center around the backlog; user stories and functionality that needs to be completed:

- Sprint retrospective and planning
- Collaborative development and testing (TDD)
  - Report to the team, offer help
- Sprint release; every sprint should end with a shippable product
- Sprint review meetings with the product owner

## Ceremonies

- Standups (daily scrum meetings)
- Sprint planning meetings
- Retrospectives
- Sprint review meeting

### Initial Startup

- Start with a vision: what is the goal for the product in one month, one year etc.
- Refine its objectives and discuss these with the stakeholders (inc. product owner)
- Create an initial backlog filled with **user stories**
- Agree on working modes and standards (coding standards, communication channels, tools etc.)

Compared to kanban which is task-oriented, scrum has a larger initial phase before the first sprint.

### Sprint Planning

- The backlog should be cleaned/refined by the product owner; other members may assist
- Priorities should be clearly stated
- The sprint should have a **global goal**; a theme which ensures everyone is targeting the same direction

Chunking stories into tasks may help with prioritization

Each implementation task should be **sufficiently described**: mockups, design, **acceptance criteria** etc.

#### User Stories

A *promise* of a conversation to be had:

- An intension of some functionality
- Conversation between the non-technical product owner and dev team
- Has **acceptance criteria** - don't just tick off criteria blindly; go back to the conversation and what the product owner wants

#### Part 1: The What

- PO presents highest priority stories
- Ensure the team fully understands the user stories the team may commit to this sprint (plus one or two more - priorities may change so it is not necessary to understand them all)
- Estimate the complexity of each story **in terms of points**
- Use previous velocity (points delivered in previous sprint) to estimate amount of work that can be done

##### Planning Poker

Uses Fibonacci-like progression (0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 20, 40, 100, ∞, ☕, ?); reflects increasing uncertainty in estimates.

Play the hands, then discuss why each person chose the value. Repeat until a consensus is reached.

For the first time the group is together, come up with a hypothetical scenario to calibrate what each number means.

NB: Don't try and convert it to hours

NB: for large numbers, using the exact Fibonacci values makes the estimate seem more accurate than it really is.

#### Part 2: The How

- **Commit** to the stories that will be taken on
- **Break down stories into small tasks**
  - Around **3 hours of work** or less
  - Describe them thoroughly so that anyone in the team can do it
- Estimate task durations (in hours) collaboratively; ensure a consensus is reached

For the first few sprints, make an estimate and then double it; **delays will cascade** and affect dependent tasks.

### Monitoring

<!--- Spikes should be time-boxed - at the end of some fixed amount of time, progress should be reported
-->

- Use a **burn-down chart**; the estimated amount of work left over time
  - At the beginning, break down all stories into tasks and estimate the time each takes; otherwise, the chart will not be very useful
- If the sprint backlog will be finished early, estimate as a team how many more stories you can take on and contact the PO
- **The PO should NEVER be surprised**
  - Let PO/SM know early if the sprint backlog won't be cleared
  - Surprise means poor communication and likely lack of alignment between stakeholders and product

### Standups

- Used in both Scrum and Kanban
- Must be short and straight ot the point
- Max 5 minutes/member

Every morning (if full time: 2/week for SENG302), answer three questions:

- What did you **achieve yesterday**
- What will you **do today**
- What **issues are you facing**
  - Don't waste an entire day tring to solve an issue alone; ask someone

### Review

- Demonstrate outcomes to the PO and stakeholders
- Follow a scenario which combines user stories that were completed in the sprint
  - Use realistic test data
- Stakeholders sign off on the functionality
- Gather feedback

### Retrospective

The team discusses what happened in the sprint.

- Prefer coffee shops/break rooms compared to large, impersonal rooms
- Come prepared with issues/suggestions communicated before hand

Discuss issues about:

- Communication: within team, or with PO/stakeholders
- Processes
- Scope: clarity of product vision
- Quality
- Environment: is the team dynamic toxic?
- Skill: is training required?

Ask what are we doing well? How can we fix improve it?

Return to the next retrospective asking if improvements were made.

Bubble method: create a list of issues alone; pair with another team member an discuss. Repeat until the whole group is together

Circle method: create a list of action items, sorting them by how well they went. Group close and related items together and fix these as a whole.

### What is *Ready* and *Done*?

Ensure all team members have the same understanding of these two words. What quality level is expected for 'ready' or 'done'?

For stories, *ready* could mean:

- The story is given a **point estimate**
- **Acceptance criteria** are clearly defined
- Story is **in the product backlog** with the correct **priority** level
- All relevant **documentation** is attached
- All tasks from the story will stay in **a single sprint**

*Done* could mean:

- All **acceptance tests passed**
- **No regressions**
- Build/deployment **scripts updated**
- The product owner has **reviewed** the functionality
- **End-user documentation** updated
