# 05. Monitor Project Progress

How do you track project progress? **Key Performance Indicator**. KPIs are:

- **Quantifiable** measures
- Indicators of success/fails
- Semantics need to be defined per context

These could be things such as system uptime, income, returning visitors.

<!-- However, not everything is purely quantifiable. -->

Metrics:

- The team must understand the metric
- The team must collect the data
- The metric must have value to the team
- Collecting the data should require little effort

Every Agile framework has its own set of metrics. Lean measures execution time; kanban on task flow; scrum on the team's ability to deliver.

## Monitoring Code Quality

### Pair Programming

Pair programming is a great way to ensure high code quality and monitor task progression: **the code you write is a reflection of the team dynamics**.

### Code Review

Review the code for:

- Invalid operation definitions (e.g. too few/many arguments) or usages
- Missing comments/documentation
- Missing unit tests
- Code quality
  - Number of files, classes (e.g. god classes), LoC
  - Code duplication
  - Documentation/comment rates
  - Code smells/technical debt
    - Input sanitization

### Sprint Reviews

The very last moment where you can track progress. Ask the PO before the review if necessary.

### Semi-Automated Tools

- IDEs (e.g. IDEA)
- Linters (e.g. ESLink)
- Static analysis (e.g. SonarQube)

Automated checks:

- Enforce common style
- Refactor common patterns
- Identify possible bugs

Aggregated vs simple metrics:

- Aggregated metrics are a overview of the quality:
  - Reliability: number of issues classified as bugs
  - Security: number of vulnerabilities (e.g. XSS)
  - Maintainability: number of code smells

Simple metrics for targeted aspects:

- Coverage: % of code covered by unit tests (e.g. num. lines, num. branches)
- Duplication: % of duplicated code
- Comments: proportion of comments
- Code-related: e.g. cyclomatic complexity, class/method size

## Refactoring and Re-engineering

Refactoring increases code quality:

- Changes a function without altering its output (e.g. extracting part of a function into a private method)
- Should be done incrementally all the time
- Should be low-risk and part of day-to-day tasks

Re-engineering fixes behavioral issues:

- Re-thinking the behavior of a part of a product (e.g. moving business logic to another component)
- Should be planned carefully
- Is a high-risk activity

## Team Dynamics

Communication:

- Day-to-day communication can act as a metric for the working atmosphere
- Ensures commitment and accountability

Stand-ups:

- Daily monitoring of progress; identify roadblocks as they arise

Retrospectives:

- Safe place to debrief
- Collaboratively think about improvements

## Sprints and Releases

Burn-down charts: graph mapping days remaining until end of sprint against remaining story points (or possibly hours of work left).

Alternative release burn-down chart:

- To predict number of sprints until release - bar chart with bar for each sprint.
- Scope likely to increase each sprint.
- Top of each bar = initial story points (for release) - story points completed towards release
- Bottom of each bar = added scope
- Release likely when lines connecting top and bottom of bars meet

Sprint interference chart:

- Hours spent/sprint on non-sprint backlog tasks
  - Emails, meetings etc.
- Try and ensure this does not increase over time.

Remedial focus chart:

- **Velocity**: number of story points completed per sprint
- Story points from scope changes should be measured separately
  - Should decrease over time
- If the velocity decreases over time, your code quality is likely decreasing
