
# 06. Agile Software Modelling

System architecture is a reflection of organization hierarchy.

## Modelling

Used to handle **complexity**: lots of functionality, interactions (possible concurrent) and constraints.

Identifying components: reuse existing libraries/resources.

Abstraction levels have been raised over the years to try reduce complexity?

Representations/models/visuals are good if:

- You know the notation: syntax and keys
- You understand the context: vocabulary
- The purpose is clear

Visual representations should:

- Be unambiguous
- Clearly state what they represent
- Identify who they target

Representations are a model of reality. All models are wrong; some models are useful.

### Class Diagrams

Every organization has their own business rules, their own vocabulary,  and concepts (with relations to each other).

Domain concepts:

- Will be logically manipulated
- Will be stored in the database
- Should be responsible for their states/logic (encapsulation)

Class diagrams are a static representation (not business logic). The semantics of all elements must be clear and fully unambiguous.

The terminology used by the client should also be used by in the code.

### Tactics

Architecture tactics:

- Relate one **quality attribute** to one architectural decision
- Tackle **one concern** at a time

Architecture style and design patterns:

- Are **reusable**, off-the-shelf, conceptual solutions
- Must be taken into account throughout the **whole project**
- May encompass **multiple tactics**

These shape the system design early on:

- **Architecture drift** can occur faster than you expect: taking the easiest path in the short term may cause issues later
- Re-engineering may be painful or impractical

### Documentation

README files should state:

- Context/objectives
- Authors, contributors, version, other pointers
- Deployment procedures, testing, dependencies
- Describe content and refer to **licensing**

Wiki pages:

- **External analysis** (e.g. wireframe, architecture, decisions)
- Manual tests (and results), DoXs, action points
- Organized into categories
- Should have a landing page
- Should be updated
- See [ADR](https://adr.github.io/), [MADR](https://github.com/adr/madr)

### Stories as Use-Case Scenarios

From a story it is difficult to:

- Put users in relation with features
- Identify system boundaries (e.g. interfaces, APIs)
- Evaluate what domain entities are created/read/updated
- Understand business/logical processes (e.g. controls)
- Understand entity properties

Robustness diagrams:

```
  웃 ------ |-o  -----> ⥀ ----- o̲ ◆-----> o
actor    boundary   control   entity  property
```

Example: As a user, I want to search for events by their types, location or date so that I will be able to subscribe to
them later.

```
user    event interface  subscribe
  웃 -------- o-| ------->  ⥀
              |             |
              |             |
              v           event
      search  ⥀ ----------  o ◆--- o location
                            ◆ ◆
                            |  \
                           date \
                                 type
```

#### Partial scenarios

As a user, I want to do *x* so that *value*: the value **does not need to be implemented in the story**, the story acts
as justification for the task.

#### Wireframes

- Identify details in forms
  - Domain concepts and attributes
- Allows discussion of general layout

c.f. robustness diagrams:

- Controls: what will be supplied between subprocesses
- Entities: refine semantics of model elements
- Transitions: from screen to screen