# 09. Continuous Integration

> Good programmers write code that humans can understand

## The Integration Problem

When combining units into a product (after testing each unit individually), problems occur with integration:

- Conflicting dependencies
- Badly-defined or -specified APIs

Diagnosis gets harder as more units are combined.

## Continuous Integration

> Working software is the primary measure of progress
>
> *Agile Manifesto, 7th Principle*


Integrate as you develop; when a story or unit is ready, integrate it immediately with master.

The smaller a chunk of code is, the easier it is to test and the easier it is to integrate.

### Fowler's Principles

1. Single source repository
2. Automate the build process
3. Make the build **self-testing**
4. Everyone commits to master/main every day
5. Every commit trigger a build on an integration machine
6. Broken builds should be fixed immediately
7. Keep the build fast
8. Test in a clone of the production environment
9. Make it easy for everyone to get the latest executable
10. Ensure everyone can see what is happening
11. Automate the deployment phase

#### Single Source Repository

All code and resources should be in a single place:

- Team may be decentralized
- Centralizes traceability of changes

Version Control:

- Centralized; one master repository e.g. subversion
  - One main trunk, branches available
- Distributed; two levels of commit e.g. git

##### Driessen's Branching and Merging Strategy

- Master: production-ready branch
- Development: branch for in-progress work
- Implementation: branches for each story/feature
  - Once feature done, merge dev to feature branch
  - Peer review, then merge to dev
- Hotfix: branch for a particular bug fix. Merge to master, dev and release
- Release: branch for a particular release
  - Run smoke tests etc.

#### Everyday Commits

- Commit any meaningful progress
  - Your machine may die; don't lose valuable work
  - Make commit messages meaningful
- Allows the team to see your progress
- If your code does not build
  - Push partial implementations
  - Evaluate if the task was under-estimated

### Merge Requests and Code Review

Ensure:

- Code is readable
  - Proper naming, documentation
- Meets expected quality
- Has unit/acceptance tests
- Has configuration/migration scripts
- Won't cause security/compatibility problems
- Code does what it is expected to do
- Commit message makes sense and describes what it does

Merge requests increases cross-functional knowledge and helps with onboarding.

When leaving feedback, be open-minded:

- Reviewer's logic is different from author's logic
  - If you're confrontational, nothing will happen (or bad things will happen)
  - Give suggestions to make it better, not just criticism
- Look for **abstractions** that can be added or removed
- Look for duplications with the existing code base
- Be critical when new dependencies are added
- Check unit/acceptance tests!

As a reviewee, remember that comments are made against the code, not you.

Be constructive and positive in giving feedback; point out what they have done right.

### Managing Builds

Build after every commit. To reduce the burden of manual configuration, create automation scripts and use an **integration server accessible to the team**.

Self-testing: automate the build with **upfront tests**.

To make builds faster:

- Run only a subset of tests
- Use fake stubs to mock external services/resources
- Run tests asynchronously

TODO

Make the latest build available to the team:

- TODO

Deploying means rolling back is also required: TODO