# 11. Wireframes, Mockups, Prototypes and User Experience

## Basic Principles

### TODO Usability

User experience is more than usability:

- Usability: does it meet user requirements?
- Efficiency: how fast is it use? How many clicks does it require
- Satisfactory: is it simple and elegant to use

Have empathy:

- Put yourself in your users' shoes
- What prior knowledge do they have? What is their target knowledge?
- Understand their frustrations and desires

Design makes a difference; two identically-capable websites TODO

### User Experience Honeycomb

Useful: is your interface serving a purpose?

Usable: is it easy to navigate and accomplish tasks?

Findable: can users find what they are searching for?

Credible: does it look like a scam?

Accessible: is it accessible to disabled people? Aria labels, contrast, font size etc.

TODO

### What Makes a Great UX?

#### TODO

Simplicity: do not overload the UI; white space is important

Consistency: consistent behaviour (e.g. button and links have consistent behaviour) and styling (colors, page layout, button names)

Dual coding: use icons and labels; just icons makes it accessible only to expert users

Don't annoy the user: avoid video autoplay, pop-ups

#### Content

Appropriate content:

- Avoid long pages; infinite scrolling not suitable for all purposes
- Expired or messy information great for scaring users
- Use interactive content and infographics; just text is boring

Keep users informed:

- Give appropriate feedback (e.g. success/error messages)
- Show action progress if it is expected to take a noticeable amount of time
- Modals visually break the 'normal' flow; use only for critical information

#### UX Tools

Input controls:

- Text/pre-formatted fields
- TODO

Navigational components: *Design* navigational components for your purpose; don't just plonk it on there

If a user doesn't understand how the navigation works, they will just leave

- Breadcrumbs
- Search fields
- Pagination
- Hyperlinks (not too many)

Information components:

- Tooltips, icons, progress bars
- Message boxes, notifications
TODO

##### Infographics

- Decide what data you want to show: What do you want to tell; to whom?
- 
- Explore possibilities; rapid hand-drawn sketches
- Choose, then create a wireframe/mock-up of your concept
- Test with users; ask specific questions about the *data*, not just 'does it look good'
- Draw shapes and add interactivity if possible (e.g. buttons, animations)
- tODO

### Semiology of Graphics

Visual Variables

- Size
- Shape
- Color:
  - Hue
  - Value
  - Saturation


Misc:

- Use whitespace; a simpler design emphasizes the elements that exist
- Think responsiveness
  - Avoid large banners; they take up a lot more space on mobile

### Test Test Test

Wireframes: low-fidelity sketch; flow between screens

Be extra careful who you engage with; if you show the wireframes, everyone will have different nitpicks and complaints

TODO


Mockups: high-fidelity representations; no interactivity

TODO

Tool-drawn


Prototype: limited functional implementation, close to the final prduct