# 13. Design Principles 2

Keep it simple:

- Aim for simplicity
- KISS
- YAGNI

Leave decisions to the last responsible moment: delay the decision so that you have the most information.

## Refactoring

Leave the world a better place than you found it.

Martin Fowler abridged: refactoring makes small *behavior-preserving transformations*, each of which are 'too small to be worth doing' but cumulatively have a significant effect.

## Object-Oriented Design

Data modelling: focus on data internal to the object

Behavior modelling: focus on services provided to the external world

OO models both; just a question of where you start from.

## Inheritance: The Dark Side

Mistakes:

- Using inheritance for implementation
- 'Is a-role-of'
- Becomes
- Over-specialization
- Violating the LSP
- Changing the superclass contract

Principle: **if it can change, it isn't inheritance**.

### Using Inheritance for Implementation

**Favour composition over inheritance**.

e.g. instead of stack *inheriting* from vector, stack should have the *stack as a private variable*; the data store for the stack.

### 'Is a-role-of'

Example inheritance tree:

```
             Person
   Student              Staff
   Postgrad       Tutor  Admin  Lecturer
                                Professor
```

What if a person is both a postgrad and tutor?

Instead, have each `Person` have multiple `Role`s. In the real world, when a person changes role, the person doesn't change.

This allows for **separation of concerns**.

### The 'Becomes' Problem

e.g. `EligibleStudent` and `IneligibleStudent` inherit from `Student`. What happens if a student becomes ineligible: the object must switch class becomes of a relatively trivial detail.

Just have eligibility as a boolean in the `Student` class.

Principle: **Inheritance isn't dynamic**.

### Over-Specialization

Method arguments etc. should use the most general interface/class you can get away with.

### Violating the Liskov Substitution Principle

LSP: the behavior of a method shouldn't change regardless of the subclass of arguments it is given.

e.g. `setWidth`, `setHeight` method for a `Rectangle`. `Square` is a subclass of `Rectangle`. Method taking `Rectangle` as argument could be given a `Square`: if it sets the width, the height will be set silently; area/perimeter calculations will give unexpected results.

If methods start telling white lies, you start walking along the path to hell.

## Single Responsibility Principle

Every module or class should have responsibility over only one part of the functionality - this responsibility should be fully encapsulated.

Why?

- More responsibility = more reasons to change
- Prevent one class/module from knowing too much

Typically found in controllers, initializers.

### Interface Segregation Principle

No client should be forced to depend on methods/interfaces it doesn't use.

- Reduces risk of 'white lies' that one day turn out to bite you in the face
- Split interfaces into cohesive, smaller, more specific ones
- Reduce coupling

e.g. `iPhone` interface can be split into `widescreen iPod`, `phone`, `internet communicator device` interfaces.

## Dependency Inversion Principle

1: When high-level modules depend on low-level modules; both should **depend on abstractions**.

2: Abstractions should not depend on details; details should **depend on abstractions**.

i.e. high-level objects should not depend on low-level implementations. Use abstractions; no one likes micro-managers.

When things change, you want as little stuff around it to change.

To do this, try to avoid `new`; explicitly instantiating concrete instances.

### Dependency Injection

Passing objects (that conforms to the broadest interface you can get away with) through a constructor rather than creating a concrete instance of it yourself.

## SOLID Principles

**S**ingle responsibility.

**O**pen-closed principle.

**L**iskov substitution principle.

**I**nterface segregation principle.

**D**ependency inversion.
