# 14-18. Design Patterns

## Object-Oriented-Design Experience

High-level: structural models (layered, client-server etc.), control models, pipes & filters.

Idioms: getters/setters, `while(&dst++ = *src++)` etc.

What comes in between? OOD wisdom - collections, event loops/callbacks, MVC etc.

### Sidenote: Literate Programming: Tangle & Weave

The order in which code makes sense to read is not the same the compiler wants to receive - so weave up the documentation and tangle up the source code.

Talk about different parts of the program from different directions - some things are best described as code, some as text, some as diagrams.

## What are Design Patterns

- Distilled wisdom about a specific problem that occurs frequently in OO design
- A reusable *design* micro-architecture

The core is a simple class diagram with extensive explanation - documentation for an elegant, widely-accepted way of solving a common OO design problem.

Design patterns are:

- Reusable chunks of good design
- Solutions to common problems
- Not a perfect solution, but balances forces
- Essential for OO developers

## A definition for 'Design Pattern'

> A **solution** to a **problem** in a **context**

### Forces

Correctness: completeness, type-safety, fault-tolerance, security, transactionality, thread safety, robustness, validity, verification etc.

Resources: efficiency, space, 'on-demand-ness', fairness, equilibrium, stability etc.

Structure: modularity, encapsulation, coupling, independence, extensibility, reusability, context-dependence, interoperability etc.

Construction: understandability, minimality, simplicity, elegance, error-proneness, etc.

Usage: ethics, adaptability, human factors, aesthetics etc.

### Resolution of Forces

Impossible to prove a solution is optional; make argument backed up with:

- Empirical evidence for goodness
  - **Rule of 3**: don't claim something is a pattern until you can point to three **independent** usages
- Comparisons with other solutions (possibly failed ones too)
- Independent authorship
  - Don't be the second person after the inventor to use it
- Reviews
  - By independent domain and pattern experts

### Documenting Patterns

- Name
- Intent: a brief synopsis
- Motivation: context of the problem
- Applicability: circumstances under which the pattern applies
- Structure: class diagram of solution
- **Participants**: explanation of classes/objects and their roles
- Collaboration: explanation of how classes/objects cooperate
- Consequences: impact, benefits, liabilities
- Implementations: techniques, traps, language-dependent issues
- Sample code
- Known uses: well-known systems already using the pattern

### Documenting Pattern Instances

- Map each participant in the GoF pattern to its corresponding element
- Interface/abstract
- Concrete
- Association

## The Gang of Four

*The* design patterns book authored by Gamma, Helm, Johnson and Vlissides containing a catalog of 23 design patterns, each being a *creational*, *structural* or *behavioural* pattern.

### Creational Patterns

#### Abstract Factory (AKA Kit)

Interface for creating families of related/dependent objects without specifying their concrete classes.

e.g. when making UI elements, want scrollbars, buttons etc. to all use the same theme.

```java
public abstract AbstractFactory {
  public AbstractProductA createProductA();
  public AbstractProductB createProductB();
}

public class ConcreteFactory1 extends AbstractFactory {
  public AbstractProductA createProductA() {
    return new ConcreteProduct1A();
  }
  ...
}
```

#### Builder

Separates construction of a complex object from its representation so that the same construction process can create different representations.

#### Factory Method (AKA virtual Constructor)

Define interface for creating an object and let subclasses decide which concrete class to instantiate - allows instantiation to be deferred to its subclasses.

Problem: code that expects an object of a particular class doesn't need to know which subclass the object belongs to (as long as it follows the LSP).

The exception to this rule is when creating a new object - you must know its exact class. Hence, **'new' is glue**.

Broken polymorphism:

```javascript
if (isWizard())       weapon = new Wand()
else if (isFighter()) weapon = new Sword();
```

Solution:

- Move the 'new' method into an abstract method
- Override that method to create the right subclass object

```java
public abstract Creator {
  public abstract Product factoryMethod();
}

public class ConcreteCreator implements Creator {
  public Product factoryMethod() {
    return new ConcreteProduct();
  }
}
```

```
Creator
factoryMethod()
doSomething()
      △ 
      |
      |
ConcreteCreator
factoryMethod() 
```

Note that it is common to have more than one factory method.

Parameterized factory methods can produce more than one type of product, add constraints/details etc.

```java
public makeWeapon(Type type) {
  if (type == Weapons.DAGGER) return new Dagger();
  ...
}

public makeWeapon(Owner self) {
  if (self.height() > 180) return BigDagger();
  ...
}
```

#### Prototype

Specify the kinds of objects to create using a prototypical instance, creating new objects by copying the prototype.

#### Singleton

Intent: ensure class only has one instance and provide a global point of access to it.

Problem:

- Some classes should only hve one instance
- How can we ensure someone doesn't construct another
- How should other code find that one instance?

Solution:

- Make the **constructor private**
- Use a **static attribute** in the class to hold the **one instance**
- Add a **static getter** for the instance

```
<<singleton>>
Singleton
private $uniqueInstance

public  $getInstance()
private Singleton()
```

(NB: `$` means static)

Use lazy initialization approach in the `getInstance` method.

Issues:

- Sub-classing the singleton is possible but difficult; may not be worth using this pattern
- Thread safety - `getInstance` should be synchronized and `uniqueInstance` be made volatile

### Structural Patterns

#### Adapter

Converts interface of a class into an interface the client expects - allows classes with incompatible interfaces to work together.

#### Bridge

Decouple an abstraction from its implementation so they can be varied independently of each other.

#### Composite

Compose objects into tree structures to represent part-whole hierarchies - allows clients to treat individual objects and compositions of objects uniformly.

#### Decorator

Attaching additional responsibilities to an object dynamically - an alternative to subclassing for extending functionality.

#### Façade

Providing an unified interface to a *set* of interfaces in a subsystem - a higher-level interface to make the subsystem easier to use.

#### Flyweight

Using sharing to support large numbers of fine-grained objects efficiently.

#### Proxy

Providing a surrogate/placeholder for another object to control access to it.

### Behavioural Patterns

#### Chain of Responsibility

Avoid coupling the sender of a request to its receiver by allowing more than one object to handle the request - chain receiving objects and pass the request along the chain until an object handles it. (e.g. errors bubble up until it gets handled).

#### Command (AKA Action, Transaction)

Intent: encapsulate the request as an object to

- Parametrize clients with different requests
- Queue/log requests
- Support undoable operations

Participants:

- `Command`:
  - Declares interface for executing the operation
- `ConcreteCommand`:
  - Implements `execute`
  - Defines binding between receiver object and action
- `Client`
  - Creates `ConcreteCommand` and sets receiver
- `Invoker`:
  - Asks the command to carry out the request
- `Receiver`:
  - Knows how to carry out the request (the target of the command)

```java
// e.g. remote control
public class Invoker {
  private Command command;
  constructor(Command command) {
    // e.g. light toggle command
    this.command = command;
    command.execute();
  }
}
}
public abstract Command {
  void execute();
  void unexecute();
}

public ConcreteCommand implements Command {
  private Receiver receiver;
  public ConcreteCommand(receiver) {
    this.receiver = receiver;
  }

  public void execute() {
    receiver.action();
  };

  public void unexecute() {};
}

public class Receiver() {
  // e.g. smart light switch
  public void action();
}

public class Client {
  private Receiver receiver;
  private ConcreteCommand command;
  Client() {
    receiver = new Receiver();
    command = new ConcreteCommand(receiver);
  }
}
```

#### Interpreter

Given a language, define a representation for its grammar and an interpreter that uses this to interpret sentences.

#### Iterator (AKA Cursor)

Problem:

- Sequentially access elements of a collection without exposing implementation
- Allows for different types of traversals (e.g. ordering, filtering)
- Allow multiple traversals at the same time

Solution:

- Move responsibility for traversal from collection to an *Iterator* object, which stores the current position and traversal mechanism
- The collection creates an appropriate iterator


```java
public interface Collection {
  public Iterator createIterator();
}

public interface Iterator {
  public Element first();
  public Element next();
  public boolean isDone();
  public Element currentItem();
}


public class ConcreteCollection implements Collection {
  public ConcreteIterator createIterator() {
  }
}

public ConcreteIterator implements Iterator {
  ...
}
```

```
<<interface>>                 <<interface>>
Collection                   Iterator
createIterator()   ------->  first()
      △                      next()
      |                      isDone()
      |                      currentItem()
      |                          △
      |                          |
ConcreteCollection           ConcreteIterator
```

The set iterator in Java does not have a `first` method as there is no guaranteed ordering.

```java
for(Collectable c: someCollection) {

}

// Implicitly does:
Collectable c;
Iterator<Collectable> iterator = someCollection.iterator();
while(iterator.hasNext()) {
  c = iterator.next();
  // But the explicit version can also do
  if (c.val == 10) {
    iterator.remove();
  }
}
```

#### Mediator

Define an object that encapsulates how a set of objects interact with each other - reduces coupling by keeping objects from referring to each other explicitly.

#### Memento

Capture and externalize an object's internal state (without violating encapsulation) so that it can be restored to this state.

#### Observer (AKA Publish-Subscribe, Dependends)

One-to-many dependency between objects so that all dependents are notified when an object changes state.

Problem: separate concerns into different classes while avoiding tight coupling and keeping them in sync (e.g. separating GUI code from model).

Solution:

- Separate into Subjects and Observers
- The Subject knows which objects are observing it but nothing else
- When the Subject changes, all Observers are notified


```
Subject                        Observer
attach(Observer)          0..*  
detach(Observer)  -----------> update(Observable, Object)
notify()
   △                                  △
   |                                  |
   |             1                    |
ConcreteSubject  <------------ ConcreteObserver
doSomething()    subject       update()
```

`doSomething` will call `notify`

In Java:

- Subject is class called `Observable` while `Observer` is an interface
- Depreciated
- Adds a 'dirty' flag to avoid notifications at the wrong time (e.g. transactions in progress?)

JavaFX introduced `java.beans.PropertyChangeSupport`:

```java
private pcs = new PropertyChangeSupport(this);

addListener(PropertyChangeListener)
removeListener(PropertyChangeListener)
pcs.firePropertyChange(String, oldVal, newVal)

class Observable {
  private PropertyChangeSupport pcs;
  public Observable() {
    pcs = new PropertyChangeSupport(this);
  }

  addListener(PropertyChangeListener pcl) {
    pcs.addPropertyChangeListener(pcl);
  }

  removeListener(PropertyChangeListener pcl) {
    pcs.removePropertyChangeListener(pcl);
  }

  doSomething() {
    pcs.firePropertyChange(name, oldVal, newVal);
  }
}

class Observer implements PropertyChangeListener {
  public propertyChange(PropertyChangeEvent pce) {

  }
}
```

Notes:

- Changes are broadcast to all Observers; each needs to decide if it cares about a particular change
- Observers don't know about each other; complex dependencies and cycles are possible
- Observers aren't told what changed
  - Figuring out what changed can take a lot of work and may require them to retain a lot of the Subject's state
  - A variant allows the update method to contain details about what changed - more efficient, but tighter coupling
- The subject should only call `notify` when it is in a consistent state (i.e. transaction has ended)
  - Beware subclasses calling base class methods that call `notify()`

#### State

Intent: allow objects to alter behaviour when their internal state changes - the object appears to have changed class.

TL;DR treat objects as FSMs that change their behaviour depending on state.

Need a state chart representation of object behaviour e.g.

```
            admin approved
o draft <------------------- 
    ^         expired       |
    | submit/               v
    | review failed      published
    v                       ^
  review ___________________| 
          admin reviewed
```

When a new stage gets added, what happens to existing object?

The pattern:

- State-specific behaviour encapsulated in concrete classes
- State interface declares one or more state-specific methods - all methods should make sense for all concrete states
- Context communicates via the state interface

Implementation:

- The context and concrete states can perform state transitions by replacing the context's state object
- If transition criteria are fixed then it can be done in the context - this allows concrete state classes to be independent
- Initial state is set in the context
- Explicit transitions prevents getting into inconsistent states

```java
public abstract State {
  void handle1();
  void handle2();
}

public class ConcreteStateA extends State {
  private Context context;

  // May possibly be in the abstract class
  public void setContext(Context context) {
    this.context = context;
  }
  public void handle1() {
    State state = new ConcreteStateB();
    context.changeState(state);
  }
  public void handle2() { }
}

public class ConcreteStateB extends State {
  public void handle1() { }
  public void handle2() { }
}

public class Context {
  State state;
  public Context(State initialState) {
    state = initialState;
  }

  public void changeState(State state) {
    this.state = state;
  }

  public void request1() {
    ...
    state.handle1();
  };

  public void request2() {
    ...
    state.handle2();
  }
}
```

#### Strategy

Defining a family of interchangeable algorithms so that the algorithm can be varied independently from the client that uses it.

#### Template Method

Define the skeleton of an algorithm, deferring some steps to subclasses - allows subclasses to redefine certain steps of an algorithm without changing its structure.

Problem: implement the algorithm skeleton but not the details

Solution: put the skeleton in an abstract superclass and use subclass operations to provide the details

```java
public abstract AbstractClass {
  public final void templateMethod() {

  }

  abstract protected void primitiveOperation1();
  abstract protected void primitiveOperation2();
}

public class ConcreteClass extends AbstractClass {
  protected void primitiveOperation1() { }
  protected void primitiveOperation2() { }
}
```

Hooks:

- Can include hooks so that subclasses can hook into the algorithm at suitable points - they are free to ignore the hook
- Hook declared in abstract class with empty or default implementation

e.g. `PrepareMeal` abstract class may have `isTakeAway` hook. Subclass could call it during their `assemble` to change how the meal is assembled depending on if it is an eat-in or takeaway meal.


#### Visitor

Represent an operation to be performed on elements of an object structure - allows new operations to be defined without changing the classes of the elements it operates on.
