# 14-15. Design Patterns

## Object-Oriented-Design Experience

High-level: structural models (layered, client-server etc.), control models, pipes & filters.

Idioms: getters/setters, `while(&dst++ = *src++)` etc.

What comes in between? OOD wisdom - collections, event loops/callbacks, MVC etc.

### Sidenote: Literate Programming: Tangle & Weave

The order in which code makes sense to read is not the same the compiler wants to receive - so weave up the documentation and tangle up the source code.

Talk about different parts of the program from different directions - some things are best described as code, some as text, some as diagrams.

## What are Design Patterns

- Distilled wisdom about a specific problem that occurs frequently in OO design
- A reusable *design* micro-architecture

The core is a simple class diagram with extensive explanation - documentation for an elegant, widely-accepted way of solving a common OO design problem.

Design patterns are:

- Reusable chunks of good design
- Solutions to common problems
- Not a perfect solution, but balances forces
- Essential for OO developers

## A definition for 'Design Pattern'

> A **solution** to a **problem** in a **context**

### Forces

Correctness: completeness, type-safety, fault-tolerance, security, transactionality, thread safety, robustness, validity, verification etc.

Resources: efficiency, space, 'on-demand-ness', fairness, equilibrium, stability etc.

Structure: modularity, encapsulation, coupling, independence, extensibility, reusability, context-dependence, interoperability etc.

Construction: understandability, minimality, simplicity, elegance, error-proneness, etc.

Usage: ethics, adaptability, human factors, aesthetics etc.

### Resolution of Forces

Impossible to prove a solution is optional; make argument backed up with:

- Empirical evidence for goodness
  - **Rule of 3**: don't claim something is a pattern until you can point to three **independent** usages
- Comparisons with other solutions (possibly failed ones too)
- Independent authorship
  - Don't be the second person after the inventor to use it
- Reviews
  - By independent domain and pattern experts

### Documenting Patterns

- Name
- Intent: a brief synopsis
- Motivation: context of the problem
- Applicability: circumstances under which the pattern applies
- Structure: class diagram of solution
- **Participants**: explanation of classes/objects and their roles
- Collaboration: explanation of how classes/objects cooperate
- Consequences: impact, benefits, liabilities
- Implementations: techniques, traps, language-dependent issues
- Sample code
- Known uses: well-known systems already using the pattern

### Documenting Pattern Instances

- Map each participant in the GoF pattern to its corresponding element
- Interface/abstract
- Concrete
- Association

## The Gang of Four

*The* design patterns book authored by Gamma, Helm, Johnson and Vlissides containing a catalog of 23 design patterns, each being a *creational*, *structural* or *behavioural* pattern.

### Creational Patterns

#### Abstract Factory

Interface for creating families of related/dependent objects without specifying their concrete classes.

#### Builder

Separates construction of a complex object from its representation so that the same construction process can create different representations.

#### Factory Method

Define interface for creating an object and let subclasses decide which concrete class to instantiate - allows instantiation to be deferred to its subclasses.

#### Prototype

Specify the kinds of objects to create using a prototypical instance, creating new objects by copying the prototype.

#### Singleton

Intent: ensure class only has one instance and provide a global point of access to it.

Problem:

- Some classes should only hve one instance
- How can we ensure someone doesn't construct another
- How should other code find that one instance?

Solution:

- Make the **constructor private**
- Use a **static attribute** in the class to hold the **one instance**
- Add a **static getter** for the instance

```
<<singleton>>
Singleton
$uniqueInstance

$getInstance()
private Singleton()
```

(`$` means static)

Use lazy initialization approach in the `getInstance` method.

Issues:

- Sub-classing the singleton is possible but difficult; may not be worth using this pattern
- Thread safety - `getInstance` should be synchronized and `uniqueInstance` be made volatile

### Structural Patterns

#### Adapter

Converts interface of a class into an interface the client expects - allows classes with incompatible interfaces to work together.

#### Bridge

Decouple an abstraction from its implementation so they can be varied independently of each other.

#### Composite

Compose objects into tree structures to represent part-whole hierarchies - allows clients to treat individual objects and compositions of objects uniformly.

#### Decorator

Attaching additional responsibilities to an object dynamically - an alternative to subclassing for extending functionality.

#### Façade

Providing an unified interface to a *set* of interfaces in a subsystem - a higher-level interface to make the subsystem easier to use.

#### Flyweight

Using sharing to support large numbers of fine-grained objects efficiently.

#### Proxy

Providing a surrogate/placeholder for another object to control access to it.

### Behavioural Patterns

#### Chain of Responsibility

Avoid coupling the sender of a request to its receiver by allowing more than one object to handle the request - chain receiving objects and pass the request along the chain until an object handles it. (e.g. errors bubble up until it gets handled).

#### Command

Encapsulate the request as an object, allowing clients to be parameterized with different requests, requests to be queued/logged, and support undoable operations.

#### Interpreter

Given a language, define a representation for its grammar and an interpreter that uses this to interpret sentences.

#### Iterator (AKA Cursor)

Problem:

- Sequentially access elements of a collection without exposing implementation
- Allows for different types of traversals (e.g. ordering, filtering)
- Allow multiple traversals at the same time

Solution:

- Move responsibility for traversal from collection to an *Iterator* object, which stores the current position and traversal mechanism
- The collection creates an appropriate iterator

```
<<interface>>                 <<interface>>
Collection                   Iterator
createIterator()   ------->  first()
      △                      next()
      |                      isDone()
      |                      currentItem()
      |                          △
      |                          |
ConcreteCollection           ConcreteIterator
```

The set iterator in Java does not have a `first` method as there is no guaranteed ordering.

```java
for(Collectable c: someCollection) {

}

// Implicitly does:
Collectable c;
Iterator<Collectable> iterator = someCollection.iterator();
while(iterator.hasNext()) {
  c = iterator.next();
  // But the explicit version can also do
  if (c.val == 10) {
    iterator.remove();
  }
}
```

#### Mediator

Define an object that encapsulates how a set of objects interact with each other - reduces coupling by keeping objects from referring to each other explicitly.

#### Memento

Capture and externalize an object's internal state (without violating encapsulation) so that it can be restored to this state.

#### Observer

One-to-many dependency between objects so that all dependents are notified when an object changes state.

#### State

Allow objects to alter behaviour when their internal state changes - the object appears to have changed class.

#### Strategy

Defining a family of interchangeable algorithms so that the algorithm can be varied independently from the client that uses it.

#### Template Method

Define the skeleton of an algorithm, deferring some steps to subclasses - allows subclasses to redefine certain steps of an algorithm without changing its structure.

#### Visitor

Represent an operation to be performed on elements of an object structure - allows new operations to be defined without changing the classes of the elements it operates on.
