# 20. Design by Contract™

Preconditions: before calling service, client must check everything is ready.

Postconditions: the service promises some invariant; something the service promises will always be true.

e.g.

```java
public class Stack<T> {
  /**
   * Precondition: stack not empty
   * Postcondition: stack unchanged, last pushed object returned
   */
  public <T> peek();

  /**
   * Precondition: stack not empty
   * Postcondition: stack size decreased by 1, last pushed object returned
   */
  public <T> pop();

  /**
   * Precondition: stack not full
   * Postcondition: stack sized increased by 1, `peek() == o`
   */
  public void push(T o);
}
```

The contract for a class is the union of the contracts of its methods.

## Testing

Contracts inform testing; assertions allow us to check:

- If preconditions hold
- If invariants are invariant
- If postconditions hold
- If there are any side effects
- If there are any exceptions

```
        Preconditions/
         Input Values
              |
              v
    |--------------------|
    | Software Component |
    |                    |
    | Errors/Exceptions  | --> Side Effects
    |                    |
    |--------------------|
              |
              v
       Postconditions/
        Output Values
```

## Inheritance

Subclasses may have different pre/post conditions. Would require checking if the object is an instance of the subclass to determine if preconditions are met - this breaks the LSP.

Contracts are inherited:

- Preconditions can be loosened
- Postconditions and invariants can be tightened

That is, **require no more, promise no less**.

Hence, instead of saying that 'Bar **is-a** Foo', we can more formally say 'Bar **conforms to the contract of** Foo.

## Guidelines

- No preconditions on queries; it should be safe to ask a question
- No fine print
  - **Don't require something that the client can't determined**; preconditions should be supported by public methods
  - But the client doesn't need to verify postconditions
- Use real code where possible
- But use English where you can't show all the semantics
- No hidden clauses; the preconditions should be sufficient and complete
- No redundant checking; **the server shouldn't verify preconditions are met**

## Specifying Contracts

Eiffel:

- Keywords in method declaration: require and ensure
- Standardized and multiple projects to add language support

Informally, Java has `assert expression: message;` statements that are disabled by default (`-ea` flag required )

### Philosophy for Exceptions

Java Exceptions iff a contract violation occurs.

Handling violations:

- Try fix the problem
- Try an alternative approach
- Clean up and throw an exception
  - Clean up: release resources, locks, rollback transactions etc.

Hence, exceptions must be caught anywhere where clean up is needed.

## Interfaces are contracts

- When a contract can be recognized independently from an implementation, an interface should be considered
- Interfaces can be composed; one class can implement many interfaces
- Interfaces can be extended to specialize contracts

## Inheritance: The Dark Side

- Inheritance for implementation; child has no intention of honouring the inherited contract
- 'Is-a-role-of': merges two contracts
- 'Becomes': switching contracts
- Over-specialization: contract more specific than necessary
- Violating the LSP; breaks the contract
