# 20. Code Smells

## Process

1. Sniff
2. Prioritise and evaluate
3. Refactor:
    - Split
    - Join
    - Move
    - Extract
    - Rename
    - etc.

## How large is large?

- Smells are inherently subjective
- Easier to detect in code we know
- Can be informed by measurements - *software metrics*
  - Define quantities that represent code qualities we want to understand
  - Gather data
  - Analyze results, statistics
    - Percentiles, min/max, outliers etc.

## Morphology

Fan-out:

- How many other methods/functions does the method call
- Is it too 'big'?

Fan-in:

- How many others call the method
- How reusable is it?

### Method Length

Metrics:

- Lines of code
  - Number of statements
  - Comments included?
  - Declarations included?
  - Whitespace included?
- Amount of logic: cyclomatic complexity
  - Number of branches
- Amount of nesting

Long methods a problem because:

- Method may be doing too many things
- Single responsibility principle
- Cohesion

How long is too long? Use:

- Metrics
- Counting rules
- Distribution analysis
  - e.g. statement count vs cyclomatic complexity; find and refactor outliers

## Object-Oriented Metrics

Chidamber & Kemerer suite commonly used:

- Weighted Methods per Class (WMC): class size
  - How many methods are there? Takes into account constructors, overloads etc.
- Number of Children (NOC): structure
- Depth in Inheritance Tree (DIT): structure
- Coupling Between Objects (CBO): dependencies
- Response For Class (RFC): message passing
- Lack of Cohesion Of Methods (LCOM): property/method interactions

### Large Class Smell

Knows too much, does too much; violating single responsibility principle

i.e. a God class

Break into smaller cohesive classes: extract class, extract interface

### Long Parameter Lists

- Interface segregation
- If the parameter list is long, what does it tell us about the method?
  - Single responsibility
  - God method?
- How complex is it?

Solutions:

- Introduce a parameter object
  - e.g. replacing start/end date with date range object
- Preserve the whole object
  - Instead of dissecting and sending particular properties of an object, just send the whole object
- Replace the parameter with a method call
  - Caller should let the method get the data itself, rather than doing it for it

### Duplicated Code

- 'Once and only once'
- Same problem may be solved in multiple ways (different programmers)

Want a single place of truth.

Solution: extract it into a method

### Message Chains

`bla.getSubProperty().getSubProperty()...`

Bad because:

- Long message stack
- Complexity
- Cause dependency between classes in the chain
  - Changes in any relationship causes cascading changes

**Law of Demeter**: only talk to immediate friends.

Method `m()` of object `o` should only invoke methods of:

- `o` itself
- Parameters of `m`
- Objects created within `m`
- Properties (attributes, direct components) of `o`

### Dead/Unreachable/Deactivated/Commented Code

Dead code:

- Source code that might be executed but the result of which is never used
- Unreferenced variables/functions not dead code; automatically removed by compiler/linker

Unreachable code:

- Code that can never be reached (e.g. switch statement, after return statement)
- No control flow path to the code; harder to read, takes up more memory, cache

Deactivated code:

- Code that can't be executed now e.g. `#if os(iOS)`

Commented code:

- Misleading, difficult to read and maintain
- Why was it commented out? Can it be deleted?
- What code can we trust?

### Switch Statements

Large switch/if statements:

- What does it mean?
- Adds conditional complexity
- May call methods all over the codebase
- OOP should rarely use switch statements; use polymorphism

Solutions:

- Switch on types? Use polymorphism
- Switch on type code? Replace type code with subclasses
- Checking against null? Introduce null objects

Can leave it alone if it just performs some simple actions

### Comments

- Integrity: are comments up to date? Can they be trusted
- Why are comments needed? Is it unreadable? Doing too many things?
- Comments vs Javadoc vs Git commits

Solution:

- If expression is difficult to understand, extract it to a variable
- If the code is difficult to understand, extract it to a method
- Rename method to make it more precise

### Names

#### Type Embedded in Name

Found mostly in old code. e.g. `strFirstName`

What happens if type is changed? Decisions should be hidden.

#### Uncommunicative Names

Should be descriptive, succinct, and have consistent names.

### Speculative Generality

When you make general solutions because you speculate/anticipate what you might need in the future: do not speculate about tomorrow's problems.

YAGNI, so don't over-engineer your solution.

But at the same time, need to balance this with planning or extensibility.

Solutions:

- Collapse hierarchy (e.g. if you have a bunch of classes that don't currently do anything)
- Inline class (opposite of extracting class)

### Inappropriate Intimacy

How much does a class need to know about another? Ideally little; low coupling is preferable.

Solutions:

- Move functions; keep data nad methods together
- Change bi-directional association to unidirectional
  - Does a key need to know about the key chain it's on?
- Replace superclass with delegate (composition over inheritance)

### Indecent Exposure

- Every variable and method should be private unless it has to be public
  - Hide your decisions
- Don't worry about efficiency: only move to direct access if informed by performance monitoring

### Feature Envy

Method making extensive use of another class (e.g. envious of their methods and which they had them).

Cohesive elements should be in the same module/class.

### Shotgun Surgery

When making a change requires splattering lots of small changes across a large swath of the system; changes should be localized.

This probably means the single responsibility principal has been violated.

Solutions:

- Move methods/data
- Create a new class

### Test Smells

Hard to test code:

- Highly coupled
- Asynchronous/multi-threaded
- GUI
- Buggy tests

Obscure tests:

- Difficult to understand
- Too much/too little information
  - Eager tests; testing too much functionality
  - Irrelevant information
  - Hard-coded test data
  - Indirect tests

Production bugs:

- Too many bugs getting to production
- Is there test coverage? Are the tests good?
- Are we checking or testing?
  - Humans test, machine check
- Are tests covering all possibilities
- Are tests buggy?

High maintenance:

- Tests need to be modified often
- Are tests too complex, obscure?
- Single responsibility principal
- Test duplication?

Fragile tests:

- Interface too sensitive (e.g. GUI tests sensitive to resizing)
- Context too sensitive
  - Pass condition sensitive to minor changes
  - Pass condition sensitive to date/time, server state

Erratic tests:

- Failing for no reason
- Works on only some environments
- Be wary of conditions in tests
