# 3. SQL Queries

## Oracle SQL Data Definition

SQL relations (tables) is a *multi-set*, NOT a *set* of tuples. Using `PRIMARY KEY` or `UNIQUE`, or the `DISTINCT` option in a query, constraints the result to a set. `DISTINCT` requires search to ensure duplicate tuples are not returned, so is slower than using `ALL` (the default).

Naming:

- Databases up to 8 characters
- Other names up to 30 characters
- Table names cannot begin with `sys_`
- Case insensitive

### Expression

An attribute (i.e. column name) or combination of attributes, operators and functions.

### Binary Operators

- Comparisons: `<` `<=`, `=`, `!=`/`<>`, `>=` and `>`
- Logical: `NOT`, `AND` and `OR`, in that order of priority. Use parentheses if needed
- `+`, `-`, `*`, and `/` can be used for numeric values
- String concatenation: `||`

### Functions

Scalar:

- Type conversion: `TO_CHAR`, `TO_DATE`, `TO_NUMBER` etc.
- Numeric: `ABS`, `CEIL`, `FLOOR`, `EXP`, `LOG`, `MOD`, `POWER`, `ROUND`, SQRT` etc.
- String: `SUBSTRING`, `UPPER`, `LOWER`, `TRANSLATE`, `CONVERT`, `LENGTH`, `LPAD` etc.
- Date/time: `SYSDATE`, `ADD_MONTHS`, `MONTHS_BETWEEN`, `NEXT_DAY` etc.

Aggregate/Set:

- `SUM`, `COUNT`, `MAX`, `MIN`, `AVG` etc.

### Predicates

- `LIKE`, `BETWEEN`, `IN`, `ANY`, `ALL`, `EXISTS`, `IS NULL`

### Misc.

SQL+:

- `set autocommit on`
- `describe schema.tablename`
- `set linesize n`
- `@sql-script-path`

### Create Schema

Schemas are used to group tables together. Permissions are set on a per-schema level.

```sql
CREATE SCHEMA schema-name
AUTHORIZATION owner
```

### Create Table

```sql
CREATE TABLE [schema-name.]table-name
(
  column-name column-specification[,
  column-name column-specification]*

  [constraint-name constraint-specification]*
)
```

Use `CREATE TABLE table-name AS (query)` to populate the table with data.

#### Notes

Constraints can be inline or defined after the columns. If the latter, multiple rows can be referenced.

Inline:

`column-definition constraints` where `constraints` can be:

- `NOT NULL`
- `DEFAULT default-value`
- `UNIQUE`
- `REFERENCES table-name` (with the primary key being the foreign key)
- `CONSTRAINT constraint-name constraint-definition` where `constraint-definition` can be:
  - `PRIMARY KEY`
  - `REFERENCES referenced-table[.foreign-key-column]`
  - `CHECK (condition)`
    - e.g. `column-name > 10`, `column-1 != column-2`
    - Value in array: `column-name IN ('val1', 'val2')`
    - The condition can only involve the name of the current column if it is inline

To define a primary key after column definitions: `PRIMARY KEY (column-name)`. A composite primary key can be made by passing multiple arguments.

To define foreign keys after column definitions:
`
```sql
FOREIGN KEY (column-name)
REFERENCES foreign-table (foreign-table-key)
[ON DELETE integrity-option]
[ON UPDATE integrity-option]
```

To add constraints after defining the table:

```sql
ALTER TABLE table-name ADD CONSTRAINT constraint-name constraint-definition
```

Where `integrity-option` is one of `RESTRICT`, `CASCADE`, `SET NULL` or `SET DEFAULT`.

Domain: basically `typedef` for SQL. NOT in Oracle:

```sql
CREATE DOMAIN domain-name type-definition [CHECK check-statement]
/* e.g. `check-statement` could be `(VALUE IS NOT NULL)` */
```

### Drop Table

Drops the relation (base table) and definition: `DROP TABLE table-name`.

### Alter Table

Add, delete or modify attributes/constraints using `ALTER` commands.

Add/modify: `ALTER TABLE table-name ADD|MODIFY column-name column-definition`. The `NOT NULL` constraint is only allowed if it also has a `DEFAULT default-value` constraint. Otherwise, the column must be added without the `NOT NULL` constraint then update all the rows, then alter the definition.

Delete column and all constraints: `ALTER TABLE table-name DROP [COLUMN] column-name RESTRICT|CASCADE`.

Delete constraint: `ALTER TABLE table-name DROP [CONSTRAINT] constraint-name RESTRICT|CASCADE`. If the constraint is a primary key or unique, `CASCADE` drops all referencing foreign keys; `RESTRICT` stops the operation if there are any referencing foreign keys.

### Drop Schema

`DROP SCHEMA schema-name RESTRICT|CASCADE`. `RESTRICT` only allows the operation to run if the schema is empty; `CASCADE` drops all children objects as well.

## Oracle SQL Queries

### `SELECT`

```sql
SELECT [ALL|DISTINCT] attribute-list
FROM table-list
[WHERE condition]
[GROUP BY grouping-attributes]
[HAVING group-condition]
[ORDER BY attribute-list]
[OFFSET n]
[FETCH NEXT m ROWS ONLY] /* Oracle specific */
```

Six clauses; the last four are optional:

- `SELECT` is like the project, $\pi$ operator
  - `ALL` is the default; `DISTINCT` removes duplicate tuples
    - The latter requires comparisons for each tuple so may be slower
  - `attribute-list` is a comma separated list where each item is:
    - `*` for all columns in the table
    - A column name
    - The result of some operation (e.g. `column_name * 10`)
- `WHERE` is like the select, $\sigma$ operator
- `ORDER BY` does sorting

### Table Alias

Oracle uses the syntax, `tableName alias`.

Other SQL implementations use `tableName AS alias`.

This may be useful when referring to two entries in the a single table (e.g. find rows where the last names the same).

The result of a nested select statement can also be aliased: `(SELECT clause that is probably using JOINs) alias`.

#### Attribute list

The attribute list can contain column names, aggregate functions and constants:

- Except for `COUNT(*)`, aggregate functions ignore `NULL VALUES`
- Can also use `DISTINCT` within aggregate functions: `COUNT(DISTINCT origin)` will return the number of distinct origin values
- Can also be a nested select statement returning a single row and column

#### Some `WHERE` predicates

- Range (inclusive): `column-name BETWEEN min AND max`
  - Can be used for numbers, dates and strings
- Membership: `column-name IN (val_1, ..., val_n)`
- Pattern matching with `LIKE`: `column-name LIKE pattern`
  - Enclose `pattern` in single quotes
  - `%` acts like `.*` in a regular expression
  - `_` acts like `.` in a regular expression
  - Can set custom escape character: `'Pattern\_Using\_Underscore` ESCAPE '\'
- Pattern matching with regular expressions: `REGEXP_LIKE(column-name, pattern, [param])`
  - `param`: `i` (case-insensitive), `c` (case-sensitive), `x` (ignore whitespace), 'm' (multiline)
- `NULL`: `IS [NOT] NULL`; `NULL != NULL` so cannot use equality comparisons

#### `GROUP BY`

For applying aggregate functions to *groups of tuples*; each group is a set of tuples where they have the same value for the grouping attribute(s) (comma-separated list). This is used for summary information, and is often phrased as *for each entity ...*.

e.g. `SELECT origin, COUNT(origin) FROM routes GROUP BY origin` returns number of times each origin value appears.

e.g. `SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT type), director FROM movie GROUP BY director` returns the number of genres of movies each director has directed.

When using `GROUP BY`, all non-aggregate attributes need to be referenced. This is as the grouping reduces the result into a single tuple, which may not be possible if they are not all referenced. For example, if `(a, b) = (0, 0), (0, 1)` is grouped by `a`, it must either pick one of the values or pick both, neither of which are allowed.

This can happen even if the primary key is used as the grouping attribute.

#### `HAVING`

Retrieves the values of these functions only for groups that satisfy certain conditions - i.e. it filters out groups.

e.g. `SELECT origin, COUNT(origin) FROM routes GROUP BY origin HAVING COUNT(origin) > 10`.

`COUNT(*)` gets the count for the group.

#### `ORDER BY`

Sorts tuples based on the values of some attributes:

```sql
ORDER BY [column-name ASC|DESC] [, column-name ASC|DESC]*
```

Default is `ASC`. Sorts by the first column name first, and when the values are equal, it sorts by the second column etc. The sort is not stable.

#### Nested Queries

A nested query/sub-query be specified within the WHERE and HAVING clauses of an outer query. The sub-query must be enclosed within parentheses.

- `ORDER BY` is not allowed
- The sub-query `SELECT` list must consist of a single attribute/expression unless the outer query uses `EXISTS`
  - If using the `in` predicate, it should return a table with one column and *n* rows
  - If using a equality predicate, it should return a table with one column and one row
- Attributes from the outer query's table can be referenced in the sub-query; this is called **correlation**, and means that the result of the sub-query is different for each row of the outer query
  - A table alias may need to be used
- A sub-query can appear on both sides of a comparison

Examples:

- `SELECT * FROM customer WHERE num_orders > (SELECT AVG(num_orders) FROM customer)`
- `SELECT * FROM movie WHERE (SELECT id FROM director WHERE lname='Nolan')`
- `SELECT * FROM movie M1 WHERE M1.awards = (SELECT MAX(awards) FROM movie M2 WHERE M1.director = M2.director)` returns the movies that have one the most awards for a given director

##### `EXISTS`

Used to check if result of *correlated* sub-query is empty.

e.g. `SELECT * FROM director D1 WHERE EXISTS (SELECT * FROM movie WHERE D1.id = director AND type='comedy')` finds directors that have directed at least one comedy.

#### Multi-table queries

Queries used nested queries using the `=` or `IN` conditions **can always be expressed as a single query**. This does a JOIN in the background, and so is much more efficient than correlated nested queries. The FROM clause may contain more than one table.

e.g. `SELECT title FROM movie, director WHERE dnumber=director AND lname='Nolan'`.

In general, if you have *n* tables, will need *n-1* join conditions.


If there is no WHERE clause, all tuples of the relations are selected and the result is equivalent to the **Cartesian product**, most of which will be nonsense.

Multi-table query for the same table: `SELECT DISTINCT M1.director FROM movie M1, movie M2 WHERE M1.director = M2.director AND M1.type='comedy' and M2.type='drama'`. A similar result could be done using an `INTERSECT` operation.

#### Specifying Joins in SQL2

```sql
... FROM table1 JOIN_TYPE table2 ON col1=col2
```

Where the join type is one of:

- `JOIN`
- `NATURAL JOIN`
- `LEFT OUTER JOIN`
- `RIGHT OUTER JOIN`
- `FULL OUTER JOIN`
- `CROSS JOIN` (Cartesian product)

The result of a join statement can also be used as a table e.g.:

```sql
SELECT title FROM
  (SELECT * FROM movie JOIN director ON movie.director=director.id) movieDirector
WHERE movieDirector.lname='Nolan' /* single quotes only */
```

To select all from both tables, use `SELECT movie.*, director.*`.

#### Set operations

`UNION`, `EXCEPT` (`MINUS` in Oracle) and `INTERSECT`. The results are sets - no duplicates, unless the keyword `ALL` is appended.

The two operands - select statements (in brackets), must return a table with the same number of properties and compatible data types.

#### `ANY`/`ALL`

Used with comparison operators and nested queries.

`ANY` is equivalent to `IN`. It is sometimes called `SOME`.

`NOT ALL` is equivalent to `NOT IN`.

The following will return movies that got more awards than all movies by a particular director:

```sql
SELECT * FROM movie WHERE awards > ALL (
  SELECT awards FROM movie, director WHERE movie.director = director.id AND lname = 'Nolan'
)
```

#### Division

$$
R \div S = T(A)
$$

$R$, $S$ has at least one common attribute e.g. The result of division with $R(A, B)$ and $S(B, C)$ will have $(A, B) - (B, C)` = (A)$.

Directors that have directed at least one movie of each type:

```sql
SELECT fname, lname FROM director WHERE NOT EXISTS (
  SELECT * FROM movie M1 WHERE NOT EXISTS (
    SELECT * FROM movie M2 WHERE M2.director = director.id AND M2.type = M1.type
  )
)
```

The `M1.type = M2.type` is able to get every single type of movie as it is not constrained to any particular director.

The following also gives the same result:

```sql
SELECT fname, lname FROM DIRECTOR
  JOIN movie ON director.id = movie.director
  GROUP BY director, fname, lname
  HAVING COUNT(DISTINCT type) = (
    SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT type) FROM movie
  )
```

The nested query is not correlated.

#### `DUAL` table

In Oracle, it is a dummy table with a single column and row which is used to get scalar values e.g. `SELECT sysdate FROM DUAL`.

### `INSERT`

Adds one or more tuples to a relation. The following requires all attributes to be listed in the same order they were specified when the table was created:

```sql
INSERT INTO table_name VALUES (attr_1, ..., attr_n)
```

To specify the attributes to insert:

```sql
INSERT INTO table_name (attr_name_1, ..., attr_name_n) VALUES (attr_1, ..., attr_n)
```

Both forms allow you to insert multiple tuples, separating them with commas.

A select statement can be used to insert multiple tuples:

```sql
INSERT INTO table_name (attr_name_list) select_statement
```

NB: two single quotes escape a quote in a string literal.

### `UPDATE`

```sql
UPDATE table_name SET attr_name_1 = expression_1, ... WHERE where_condition
```

The where condition is optional.

### `DELETE`

```sql
DELETE FROM table_name WHERE where_condition
```

You can only delete data from one table at a time (except if `CASCADE` is used on a foreign key).

If the where condition is missing, every row gets deleted.

### Views

Views are virtual tables - essentially a stored query that allows customized access to data (e.g. remove access to some sensitive attributes of a table).

In general, for a view to be updatable (varies by implementation):

- Must be defined over a single table
- Must contain a primary or candidate key of the base relation
- Cannot use grouping or aggregate functions

```sql
CREATE VIEW view_name AS select_statement
```

Once a view is created, it can be queried like a normal table.

To drop a view:

```sql
DROP VIEW view_name
```

In Oracle, to find out which views are updatable:

```sql
SELECT column_name, updatable FROM user_updatable_columns WHERE table_name=upper('view_name')
```

### Indexes

Indexes are a physical-level feature; access structures to speed up queries.

```sql
CREATE INDEX index_name ON table_name (attr_name_1, ...)
```

In older versions of Oracle, indexes would not be created for keys. In this case, a index would need to be created with the `UNIQUE` keyword.

`DROP INDEX index_name` is used to delete indexes.

Notes:

- Indexes should be created **before tables are populated**
- Indexes should not be created for attributes that are frequently updated
- Current versions of Oracle creates indexes for primary and secondary keys
- Indexes are often used in search and join conditions

### Integrity Component

SQL 92 adds:

- Required data (`NOT NULL)`
- Domain constraints
- Entity integrity (`PRIMARY KEY`, `UNIQUE`)
- Referential integrity (`FOREIGN KEY`, `REFERENCES`)
- Referential integrity constraint violation behaviour (`ON UPDATE`, `ON DELETE`)
- Enterprise constraints

#### Domain Constraints

Not in Oracle:

```sql
CREATE DOMAIN domain_name AS data_type DEFAULT default_option CHECK (search_option)
```

Both `DEFAULT` and `CHECK` are optional, and `search_option` should reference the value of the value using `VALUE`.

Use `DROP DOMAIN domain_name`, optionally appending `RESTRICT` or `CASCADE`.

#### Referential Integrity Violation

The qualifiers are `ON DELETE` and `ON UPDATE`.

The options are `SET NULL`, `CASCADE` and `SET DEFAULT`.

Oracle only supports `ON DELETE CASCADE` and `ON DELETE SET NULL`.

#### Enterprise Constraints

##### Constraints

```sql
CONSTRAINT constraint_name CHECK (condition)
```

This is for a specific table, so the condition can reference multiple attributes. In SQL2, the condition may include a nested `SELECT` statement.

##### Assertions

Constraints spanning multiple tables can be made: these are called assertions.

```sql
CREATE ASSERTION assertion_name CHECK (search_condition)
```

The search condition will be a SQL query, probably using the `EXISTS` keyword.

This is not supported in Oracle.

##### Triggers

Triggers monitors the state of the database and performs some action when a specific condition occurs.

Triggers can:

- Calculate/update values of derived attributes
- Enforce additional constraints
- Prevent invalid transactions
- Automatically perform actions
- Audit changes
- Maintain replicated tables 

A trigger has an **event** - a change that activates a trigger. This can be:

- A DML event such as `UPDATE`, `INSERT` or `DELETE`
- A DDL event such as `CREATE`
- A database event such as `SERVERERROR ON DATABASE`

For DML events, there are **row-level** and **statement-level triggers**; the former occurs for each modified row while the latter runs once for each statement.

Once an appropriate event occurs, it must pass a **condition**; a query which determines if the trigger should be activated.

If the condition is met, the **action** will occur. This can be one or more statements (procedures).

The action can occur `BEFORE`, `AFTER`, or `INSTEAD OF`.

```sql
CREATE|REPLACE TRIGGER [schema.]trigger_name
BEFORE|INSTEAD OF|AFTER
DELETE|INSERT|UPDATE OF attr_name_1, attr_name_2... OR DELETE|INSERT|UPDATE OF ...
ON [schema.]table_name|view_name
[REFERENCING OLD AS old_row_alias NEW AS new_row_alias]
FOR EACH ROW|STATEMENT
WHEN (condition)
  body
/
```

Within the SQL statements, if `REFERENCING` is not specified, `:new.attribute_name` and `:old.attribute_name` are used to reference attributes values for the row in question.

The `/` is used to end the trigger action. It must be on a new line.

Limitations:

- The name of the trigger must be unique
- The body cannot contain DDL or transaction statements
- The trigger cannot read from or modify the mutating table, with some exceptions
- `INSTEAD OF` is only available for views
- `WHEN` is only available for row-level triggers. The condition cannot be a query

To alter the trigger:

```sql
ALTER TRIGGER [schema.]trigger_name ENABLE|DISABLE|COMPILE [DEBUG]
```

`SHOW ERRORS` shows any compilation errors.

###### PL-SQL Example Code

```sql
DECLARE
  varname type := initial_value;
  varname2 type;
BEGIN
  SELECT attribute INTO varname FROM table_name WHERE ...;
  RAISE_APPLICATION_ERROR(num => error_code, msg => 'Message');
  -- Error code between -20999 and -20000
  ...;
EXCEPTION
  handlers;
END;
```

Cannot use `EXISTS`: must store `COUNT(*)` into variable.

###### Example: Audit Trigger

```sql
CREATE [OR REPLACE] TRIGGER audit_trigger BEFORE INSERT OR DELETE OR UPDATE ON table_name
FOR EACH ROW
begin
  if INSERTING then
    INSERT INTO audit_table VALUES (USER || 'inserting' || 'new id:' || :new.id);
  elsif DELETING then
    INSERT INTO audit_table VALUES (USER || 'deleting' || 'old id:' || :old.id);
  elsif UPDATING('attribute_name') then
    INSERT INTO audit_table VALUES 
      (USER || 'updating' || 'old value:' || :new.attribute_name || 'new value:' || :new.attribute_name);
  elsif UPDATING then
    INSERT INTO audit_table VALUES 
      (USER || 'updating' || 'old id:' || :old.id || 'new id:' || :new.id);
  end if;
end;
/
```

##### Procedures

Collection of statements; basically functions:

```sql
CREATE|REPLACE PROCEDURE [schema].procedure_name
argument_name [IN|IN OUT|OUT] datatype, ...
IS|AS
  body
```

The body cannot contain DDL statements.

Compiling a procedure: `ALTER PROCEDURE [schema.]procedure_name COMPILE`.

### Database Security

**Discretionary** and **mandatory** security mechanisms.

Control measures:

- Access control: user accounts
- Inference control: operations a user can make

The **DBA** is responsible for the overall security of the database. They have the responsibility to grant privileges to users and assign security levels users and data.

They can set privileges at the **account** and **relation** level:

- Account: specifies operations that the account is allowed to run
- Relation: specifies operations the account is allowed to run on individual tables

Each table is assigned an **owner account**; they have **all** privileges for the table, and can give privileges to other users.

Privileges can also be specified using views, allowing, for example, users access to only some attributes of a table.

```sql
GRANT account_privilege|table_privilege|ALL PRIVILEGES
ON object
TO user|role|PUBLIC
WITH GRANT OPTION;


REVOKE account_privilege|table_privilege|ALL PRIVILEGES
ON object
FROM user|role|PUBLIC;

/* EXAMPLES */
GRANT CREATE TABLE TO user WITH GRANT OPTION;
GRANT INSERT, DELETE ON table1, table2 TO user;
GRANT UPDATE ON table1(attribute1) TO user;
```

Table privileges: `SELECT; INSERT; UPDATE; ALTER; DELETE; INDEX; DEBUG; REFERENCES`. `INSERT`, `UPDATE` and `REFERENCES` (allows user to have a FK to the table) can be constraint to specific attributes.

If `GRANT OPTION` is set, the user granted the privilege can grant the privileges to other users; **propagation**. However, if the privilege is revoked, **all propagated privileges are automatically revoked**.
