# 8. Data Catalogs

Data catalogs store metadata for database objects such as relations, attributes, domains, constraints, authorization and security information, owners, indexes.

The catalog is stored as a set of **read-only relations and views** (system tables).

The catalog is used:

- By the DDL and SDL compilers
- By the query and DML parsers
  - These convert high-level queries and DML statements into low-level file access commands
  - They use the internal schema to determine an optimal way to execute the query/command
- By the DBA for authorization and security checking, who has privileges to update the catalog
- For external-to-conceptual mapping of queries/DML commands

The catalog consists of base tables and user-accessible views. The latter consists of:

- USER views (objects owned by user)
  - e.g. `USER_CATALOG`, `USER_TAB_COLUMNS`, `USER_CONSTRAINTS`
- ALL views (objects the user has privileges to view)
  - e.g. `ALL_CATALOG`, `ALL_OBJECTS`
- DBA views (all objects)

## Examples

Some interesting catalog tables:

### `ALL_TABLES`

Contains information about all tables you have view permissions for. To view the number of rows for a specific table:

`SELECT NUM_ROWS FROM ALL_TABLES WHERE OWNER = 'owner_name' AND TABLE_NAME = 'table_name'`

Number of blocks used is also stored

The catalog is updated regularly, so it may contain stale data. The `LAST_ANALYZED` row contains the time it was last updated. To force an update, use the command `ANALYZE TABLE table_name COMPUTE_STATISTICS`

### `ALL_USERS`

Contains information about all users you have view permissions for. The password is not viewable.

`USER_USERS` contains information about your own user.

### `ALL_INDEXES`

Contains information about indexes: metadata such as the number of distinct keys, if it is primary/secondary etc.

### `ALL_VIEWS`

Contains the definition (SQL query) for the view and other metadata. The definition cannot be modified directly as the catalog is read-only.

### `ALL_CONS_COLUMNS`

Check constraints for all tables: constraint name, table name, owner, name of the column the constraint is for etc.

### `ALL_CONSTRAINTS`

Contains more information about constraints including the search condition (SQL constraint definition) and constraint type (stored as a char - can be check constraint, primary/unique key, referential integrity constraint etc.)

### `TABLE_PRIVILEGES`

Grantee, owner, grantor, table name and privileges (select, insert etc.) for each grantee.
