# 07. Introduction to Routing

## Network Layer Overview

Names of data units:

- Application: message
- Transport: segment
- Network: datagram
- Link: frame

Responsibilities of layers:

- Network layer: responsible for finding a route from A to B
- Transport layer: responsible for transporting data from A to be **reliably** or **easily**
- Application layer: responsible for sharing data

Layering: each layer takes data from above, adds header information then passes the new data unit to the layer before.

Possible services of a general network layer:

- Guaranteed delivery (with/without bounded delay)
- In-order delivery
- Guaranteed minimal bandwidth
- Guaranteed maximum jitter
  - Jitter: gap between two consecutive messages

The internet network layer, IPv4 guarantees none of these.

## Routing Overview

Routing is a **network-wide** process that determines the end-to-end paths packets take from source to destination.

The network needs to work out the path from the sending to receiving **router** **automatically** in an **dynamic environment**.

A router uses its routing table to forward a packet to some output link.

The router's **switch fabric** - the physical architecture of the router, varies. Some implementations put the network interfaces/line cards close to the CPU to decrease processing times. The cross bar architecture is used to more quickly forward packets to outgoing interfaces.

### Hierarchical Overview

There are **inter-AS** and **intra-AS** routing algorithms, where AS stands for an **autonomous system**.

Each ISP is an AS, and some corporations and universities are also ASs.

Each AS is a set of routers and networks **managed by a single organization**. The routers exchange information via a common routing protocol - the intra routing protocol.

The only inter-AS routing protocol is that is used is BGP. The RIP and OSFP protocols are the two main intra-AS routing protocols. All three are load-insensitive.

There are three types of AS:

- **Stub** AS
  - Has only one connection to another AS
  - Like a leaf node
- **Multi-homed** AS
  - Has more than one connection to other ASs, but **does not allow traffic to path through**
  - e.g. university network will not be doing forwarding
- **Transit** AS
  - Has more than one AS and allows traffic to path through
  - Run by ISPs

### Forwarding vs Routing

Forwarding and routing are two independent processes.

Routing **determines the path to take**:

- Is not done packet-per-packet
- Is non-real time: up to two minutes of latency
- Requires communication between routers to **jointly create forwarding tables**

Forwarding transfers packets hop-by-hop:

- It determines which outgoing link to use on a packet-by-packet basis
- Is done in real time, possibly in hardware

The forwarding table:

- Maps a destination address to an interface
- Results from either the execution of the routing protocol or is static and preconfigured
- Is consulted for every packet
- Changes on relatively large timescales (e.g. topology or load changes)

### Classification of Routing Algorithms

Routing algorithms solves a routing problem with ideal assumptions. Routing **protocols** embeds a routing algorithm in a real network environment; it operates in a distributed environment and can work around failure cases.

#### Classifications

##### Static/dynamic

Static algorithms change very slowly over time, mostly due to human intervention.

Dynamic algorithms re-compute routes in response to topology or traffic changes. The computation may occur periodically or in response to changes.

##### Global/Decentralized

Global algorithms assumes each node has global knowledge/state information on the network.

Decentralized algorithms assume no node has complete state information about the network and exchange information with their neighbors.

##### Load-sensitive/-insensitive

Load-sensitive algorithms assume link costs vary dynamically depending on the level of congestion in the link.

Internet routing protocols such as RIP, OSPF and BGP are load-insensitive and assign a static cost to each link.
