# 8. Introduction to Routing - Link-State Routing

## Modelling

Routers are modelled as nodes and links are modelled as edges. Edges have associated **metrics**:

- Cost of the link: delay, monetary costs, distance etc.
- Available resources: current capacity etc.

Dijkstra calculates the least-cost path

## Assumptions

Each router has a **complete network picture**: topology, link costs etc.

To do this, each router reliably **floods** information about its neighbours to every other router. All routers should have **consistent information**.

Flooding can sometimes cause **broadcast storms**; **controlled flooding** or **spanning-tree broadcasts** are used to prevent this.

## Dijkstra's Algorithm

After flooding, each router independently calculates the least-cost path from itself to every other router using Dijkstra's algorithm and generates a forwarding table for every destination.

Definitions:

- `u`: source node
- `S`: nodes whose least-cost path is already known; initially `S={u}`. One node is added to `S` each iteration
- `c(i, j)`: cost of edge between `i` and `j`
- `D(v)`: current minimum cost of path from `u` to node `v`. Initially:
  - `D(V) = c(u, v)` if `u` is adjacent to `v`
  - `D(v) = \infty` otherwise
- `p(v)`: parent/predecessor node of `v` - vertex before `v` along the shortest path from `u` to `v`

Until all nodes are in `S`:

- Find the smallest `D(w)` where `w` is not in `S`
- Add `w` to `S`
- For all `v` adjacent to `w` and not in `S`:
  - `D(V) = min{D(V), D(w) + c(w, v)}`
    - i.e. see if the cost of `w` plus the cost between `w` and `v` is less the current cost of `v`

Running this algorithm, a forwarding table can be generating, mapping some destination to the next hop.

Complexity:

- If a min-heap is used, getting the least-cost node `w` not in `S` is `O(log(n))`
- For each iteration, `D(v)` needs to be updated for all of `w`'s neighbours: `O(n)`

### Oscillation with Link-State Routing

Since routers have a complete network picture, if one router finds a cheaper path through node `w`, it is likely that other routers will also use a path through `w`. If the algorithm is load-sensitive, this will cause the link cost of paths through `w` to increase, repeating the cycle.
