# Mid-Term Test Notes

## Sockets

IP: stateless, unacknowledged, unreliable, unordered.

TCP/UDP add ports on top of IPv4 for addressing.

TCP/Stream:

- Acknowledgements of failure
- Record boundaries not preserved

UDP/Datagram:

- One `write`, one packet; one `read`, one packet

API:

- `bind`: socket to IP port/address family
- `listen`: declare accepting incoming requests
  - `accept`: waits until request received. Returns a new socket
- `connect`
  - TCP: request establishment of connection
  - UDP: default receiver when using `send`/`write`
- `read`/`recvfrom`: get received data. Blocking if no data
- `write`/`sendto`: send data. Blocking if buffer is full
- `sendto`/`recvfrom` specifies port/address family of sender/receiver
- `close`: free resources

Network byte order: big endian.

## Protocol Layering

Service access point: interface to service for higher layer.

```
| Header | Higher-layer payload/service data unit | Trailer |
```

### OSI

Physical/Link layers single-hop scope.

Network layer use single-hops to achieve end-to-end communication.

Routers implement physical, link and network which are intentionally kept simple (and thus allows hardware implementations for high performance).

Physical:

- Bits to modulation of signal
- Specifies signal, modulation, bit synchronization etc.

Link:

- MAC: flow control etc.
- LLC: frames, error detection/coding, retransmission

Network:

- Addressing and routing; end-to-end delivery of messages
- Specifies addressing format, exchange of routing information, possibly establishment etc. of connections

Transport:

- Reliable, in-sequence, transparent end-to-end transfer
- Error control to guard against routers dropping packets
- Congestion control (stopping network overload, fair resource allocation) and end-to-end flow control (stopping receiver overload)

Session:

- Communication sessions between applications
- May involve several transport layer connections
- Controls duplex/half-duplex/simplex operation

Presentation:

- Endian conversion

Application:

- High-level support functions e.g. HTTP

TCP/IP reference model: physical/network interface/internet/transport/application.

Transport:

- End-to-end communication using the socket interface
- SAPs called ports; multiplexing over a single network adapter
- PDUs generated by this layer called segments

### Service Primitives

Confirmed service:

- User A sends `request` (with data?)
- Provider A generates PDU(s)
- Provider B receives PDU(s), sends `indication` to user B
- User B generates `response` (with data?)
- Provider B generates response PDU
- Provider A receives response, sends `confirm` to user A

Unconfirmed: no `response` or `confirm` e.g. UDP.

Confirmed Delivery: Provider B sends PDU when request PDU received regardless what user B does.

Multiplexing:

- Several *N* SAPs transmitting data over a single *N-1* SPA
- Scheduling to determine which SAP to serve
- Requires identifier (e.g. port numbers)

Splitting:

- Single *N* entity using several *N-1* SAPs
- Scheduling to determine which SAP to use for a given PDU
- May require sequencing mechanisms

Fragmentation:

- When PDU is too large for the lower-layer protocols; partition into fragments
- Numbering of fragments

Blocking:

- Buffering small SDUs into a single PDU
- Markers required to separate SDUs

## Physical Layer

- Formatting: ADC - source signal into digital data
- Source coding/compression. Lossy coding/relevancy reduction and lossless/redundancy reductiom
- Channel coding: adding redundant information for error correction - reduces bit-error probability
- Modulator: maps bits to physical signal/waveform of a certain duration - symbol time
- Baseband transmission. Bipolar NRZ: `1=x V`, `0=-x V`. Unipolar: `1=x V`, `0=0 V`
- Attenuation: signal **power** at transmitter divided by receiver. Lower is better
- Thermal noise: normal distribution added to signal

Passband transmission:

$$
s(t)= A(t)\cdot cos[(f_c + f(t)) \cdot t + \phi(t)]
$$

Where `t` is less than duration `T`, the symbol duration, `A(t)` is the amplitude, `f(t)` is the frequency offset, `f_c` is the center frequency and `\phi(t)` is the phase.

- Amplitude shift keying: varies `A(t)` for each symbol
- Frequency: varies `f(t)` for each symbol
- Phase: varies `\phi(t)`

Quadrature Amplitude Modulation: varies amplitude and phase. `n` unique amplitudes and `n` unique phases for `n^2` symbols. Greater throughput but higher error rate.

Carrier synchronization: synchronizes frequency and phase.

NRZ can lead to long runs of the same bit and loss of synchronization.

Manchester encoding: [-x, x] voltage range:

- 1: high to low in middle of symbol duration
- 0: low to high ""

Frame synchronization, ethernet: preamble at start for carrier synchronization, then start-frame-delimiter.

End of frame detection: gap between frames, deliberate code violations, dedicated length fields, special flags (with escape codes).

## LAN

Geometric RV:

- Type 1, Bernoulli trial: returns probability of *k* **failures** before success: `P(k)=p(1-p)^k`, Expected value is `(1-p)/p`
- Type 2, probability of *k* **trials** before first success: `P(k)=p(1-p)^(k-1)`, expected value `1/p`

- Bus: tap line attaches all stations to bus. Broadcast medium
- Star: private full-duplex channel for each station. Central un it is a repeater or bridge/switch
- MAC: multiple stations, shared channel usable by one station at a time, no other channels, broadcast medium
- Want: small medium access delay, fairness, reuse of resources, low overhead, stability

Orthogonal: behaviour of one station independent of another.

Frequency division multiple access:

- Bandwidth divided into sub-channels + guard channels
- Separate receivers/tunable receiver - latter requires switching before transmission starts
- 0 medium access delay, B/n bandwidth

Time:

- Full bandwidth for 1/n of the time. Avg MAD is half superframe time plus B/n
  - Avg better than FDMA for n>2
- Requires time synchronization

Both require some way of allocating sub-channels/time slots.

Random access protocol: no central station/shared state.

ALOHA:

- Transmit packet + checksum immediately
- Receiver sends immediate ack
- If timer expires, random backoff time chosen; repeat until threshold reached
- vulnerability period: if a station sends a packet of size n, vulnerability period one frame before and during sending of packet (if that packet has the same size)
- Unstable for high loads due to increasing collision rates

CSMA - carrier sense multiple access. Carrier sense: almost instantaneous check of if the medium is busy. Fails if time difference between two stations starting collisions is smaller than the propagation delay.

Non-persistent CSMA:

- If medium busy, generate random backoff time, then check again
- High probability of medium being idle after transmission finishes

p-persistent CSMA:

- Time is divided into very small frames
- Once medium is free, probability p of starting transmission. If collision occurs, restart
- If defers, repeats the process the next time slot
- Low p leads to stability in high load but low throughput in low load

1-persistent: CMSA/CD:

- Send unconditionally at end of transmission: avoid idle time
- Detect collision immediately if multiple stations transmit
  - Abort transmissions
  - Send jamming signal
  - Begin collision resolution

### Ethernet

Manchester Encoding:

| Length  | Name          |
| ------- | ------------- |
| 7       | `Preamble`    |
| 1       | `SOF`         |
| 6       | `DstAddr`     |
| 6       | `SrcAddr`     |
| 2       | `Length/Type` |
| 46-1500 | `Payload`     |
| 4       | `FCS`         |

MAC address: 48 bit globally unique. If first of address is 1, multicast. Else, unicast address.

If L/T >= 1500, type field (e.g. IPv4, ARP) to allow for protocol multiplexing. Else, length field. Type assumed to be first two bytes of payload.

Broadcast: half-duplex, MAC needed, 10 Mbps PHYs.

MAC protocol: CSMA/CD:

- `coll` set to zero
- Carrier-sense; once medium idle, transmission starts immediately
- If collision detected
  - Abort, send jamming signal, increment `coll`
  - Drop packet if `coll > 16`
  - Wait for backoff time
    - Backoff window: `[0, 2^{min(10, coll) - 1}]` 
    - Multiply by slot time; predefined time large enough for max round-trip time
  
- Minimum frame size: transmitter can only detect collision while it is still transmitting by measuring voltage on medium


- Repeater: amplify signal on analog level
- Regenerating repeater: demodulate then modulate on a symbol-by-symbol level. No error checking
- Hub: centralized repeater; broadcast signals to all ports. Basically a bus
- Bridge: interconnects LANs on the MAC layer - must have the same MAC address structure
  - Peeks at source address to learn what stations are on what LANs
  - If destination address unknown, broadcasts packet to all other LANs
- Switches: private full-duplex links for all stations. Frames transmitted to only the correct port - allows parallel transmissions

## IP

Big endian byte ordering

| Length      | Name                 |
| ----------- | -------------------- |
| Bytes 0-3   |                      |
| 4           | Version (=4)         |
| 4           | Hdr Len (numBytes/4) |
| 6           | TOS/DSCP (zeros)     |
| 2           | Unused (zeros)       |
| 16          | TotalLength (bytes)  |
| Bytes 4-7   |                      |
| 16          | Identification       |
| 3           | Flags (0, DF, MF)    |
| 13          | FragmentOffset (offset/8) |
| Bytes 8-11  |                      |
| 8           | Time-To-Live (usually 32/64) |
| 8           | Protocol Type        |
| 16          | Header Checksum      |
| Bytes 12-15 |                      |
| 32          | Source Address       |
| Bytes 16-19 |                      |
| 32          | Destination Address  |
| Bytes 20+   |                      |
| 32*n*       | Options + Padding    |
|             | Data                 |

Last fragment has MF unset, and non-zero FragmentOffset to differentiate from an unfragmented packet.

Protocol type: determines higher-level protocol that generated the payload (e.g. UDP/TCP).

Routing table: map from destination address to output port.

Host address of all 0s: network as a whole being referred to. All 1s: broadcast address.

Lookup:

- Check for full host address match
- Check for network address match
- Use default
- Drop packet, send ICMP message

End hosts have default route + entry for each network it is directly connected to.

Core routers: know almost all internet networks, have no default routers.

Address Resolution Protocol: map from IP to MAC:

- Each has ARP cache, entries discarded fixed time after insert (or last use)
- Broadcast message containing own IP/MAC + IP of target
- Target responds with own IP/MAC plus requester IP/MAC

Internet Control Message Protocol - optional protocol used to inform sender of error.
