# 08. Number Theory for Public Key Cryptography

- Number theory problems used in public key cryptography
- Need efficient ways of generating large prime numbers
- Definitions of hard computational problems are the base of crypto systems

## Chinese Remainder Theorem (CRT)

Let $p$, $q$ be relatively prime.

Let $n = pq$ be the modulus.

Given integers $c_1$ and $c_2$ there exists a unique integer $0 \le x \lt n$ such that:

$$
\begin{aligned}
x &\equiv c_1 \pmod p \\
x &\equiv c_2 \pmod q
\end{aligned}
$$

$$
x \equiv \frac{n}{p}y_1c_1 + \frac{n}{q}y_2c_2 \pmod n
$$

Where:

$$
\begin{aligned}
y_1 \equiv \left(\frac{n}{p}\right)^{-1} \pmod p = q^{-1} \pmod p \\
y_2 \equiv \left(\frac{n}{q}\right)^{-1} \pmod q = p^{-1} \pmod q
\end{aligned}
$$

### Example

Find $x$ such that $x \equiv 5 \pmod 6$ and $x \equiv 33 \pmod {35}$:

- $c_1 = 5$ and $c_2 = 33$
- $p = 6$ and $q = 35$ are relatively prime so CRT can be used
- $n = 6 \cdot 35 = 210$

For $y_1$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{210}{6}y_1 &\equiv 1 \pmod 6 \\
           35y_1 &\equiv 1 \pmod 6 \\
            5y_1 &\equiv 1 \pmod 6 \\
             y_1 &\equiv 5 \pmod 6
\end{aligned}
$$

Make sure you replace $q$ with $q \bmod p$ (assuming $q \gt p$): otherwise instead of finding $5^{-1} \pmod 6$, you will find $6^{-1} \bmod 35$.

For $y_2$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{210}{35}y_1 &\equiv 1 \pmod {35} \\
             6y_1 &\equiv 1 \pmod {35} \\
              y_1 &\equiv 6 \pmod {35}
\end{aligned}
$$

$$
\begin{aligned}
x &\equiv \frac{n}{p}y_1c_1 + \frac{n}{q}y_2c_2 \pmod n \\
  &\equiv (35 \cdot 5 \cdot 5) + (6 \cdot 6 \cdot 33) \pmod {210} \\
  &\equiv 173 \pmod {210}
\end{aligned}
$$

### Example 2

Find $x$ such that $x \equiv 5 \pmod{7}$ and $x \equiv 7 \pmod{10}$

$\mathrm{gcd}(7, 10) = 1$; $p$ and $q$ are relatively prime. Hence, CRT applies.

Hence $n = 7 \cdot 10 = 70$

$$
\begin{aligned}
x &\equiv 10 \cdot y_1 \cdot 5 + 7 \cdot y_2 \cdot 7 &\pmod{70} \\
  &\equiv 50 y_1 + 49 y_2 &\pmod{70}
\end{aligned}
$$

Where:

- $y_1 \equiv 10^{-1} \pmod{7}$
  - As $(5 \cdot 10)^{-1} \equiv 1 \pmod{7}$, $y_1 = 5$

- $y_2 \equiv  7^{-1} \pmod{10}$
  - As $(3 \cdot  7)^{-1} \equiv 1 \pmod{10}$, $y_2 = 3$

Hence:
$$
\begin{aligned}
x &\equiv 50 y_1 + 49 y_2 &\pmod{70} \\
  &\equiv 50 \cdot 5 + 49 \cdot 3 &\pmod{70} \\
  &\equiv 250 + 147 &\pmod{70} \\
  &\equiv 40 + 7 &\pmod{70} \\
  &\equiv 47 &\pmod{70}
\end{aligned}
$$
Test:

- $47 \bmod{7}  = 42 + 5 = 5$ as required
- $47 \bmod{10} = 40 + 7 = 7$ as required

## Euler Function

Given the positive integer $n$, the Euler function $\phi(n)$ denotes the number of positive integers less than $n$ and relatively prime to $n$.

e.g. $\phi(10) = 4$ as $\mathbb{Z}^{*}_{10} = \{ 1, 3, 7, 9 \}$.

### Properties

$\phi(p) = p - 1$ where $p$ is prime.

$\phi(pq) = (p - 1)(q - 1)$ where $p$ and $q$ are distinct primes.

if $n = p_1^{e_1} \dots p_t^{e_t}$ where $p_i$ are distinct primes, then:

$$
\phi(n) = \prod_{i = 1}^{t}{p_i^{e_i - 1}(p_i - 1)}
$$

e.g. for $24 = 2^3 \cdot 3^1$, $\phi(24) = 2^2(2 - 1) \cdot 3^0(3 - 1) = 4 \cdot 2 = 8$

### Fermat's Theorem

Let $p$ be a prime; for any integer $a$ such that $1 \lt a \le p - 1$:

$$
a^{p - 1} \mod p = 1
$$

### Euler's Theorem

More general case of Fermat's theorem.

If $\mathrm{gcd}(a, n) = 1$ (i.e. $a$ and $n$ coprime) then:

$$
a^{\phi(n)} \mod n = 1
$$

## Primality Tests

Testing for primality by trial division not practical for large numbers.

There are many probabilistic methods, although these may fail in exceptional circumstances.

Agrawal, Saxena, Kayal 2002: polynomial time deterministic primality test, although still impractical.

### Fermat Primality Test

Fermat's little theorem: if $p$ is prime, $a^{p - 1} \mod p = 1$ for all $a$ such that $\mathrm{gcd}(a, p) = 1$.

If $a^{n - 1} \mod n \neq 1$, $n$ is NOT a prime.

The probability of failure can be reduced by repeating the test with different base values of $a$.

Given the number $n$ to test for primality and $k$, the number of times to run the test:

- Pick $a$ at random such that $1 \lt a \lt n - 1$
- If $a^{n - 1} \mod n \neq 1$, return $n$ as being *composite*. Otherwise, return *probable prime*
  - The powers can be reduced using the following properties:
    - $ab \bmod n = (a \bmod n)(b \bmod n) \bmod n$
    - $(a^m)^k \bmod n = (a^m \bmod n)^k \bmod n$

Some composite numbers such as $561$ and $1105$ are called *Carmichael numbers*; the Fermat primality test always returns these numbers as being *probable primes*.

#### Example

Check if $517$ is prime, running the test at most four times with values $a = 2, 3, 11, 17$.

$n - 1 = 517 - 1 = 516 = 43 \cdot 3 \cdot 2^2$

Using $a = 2$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
2^{516} \bmod{517} &= \left(2^{43} \bmod{517}\right)^{12} \bmod 517 \\
&= (382)^{12} \bmod 517 \\
&= \left((382)^3 \bmod 517\right)^4 \bmod 517 \\
&= (28)^{4} \bmod 517 \\
&= 460 \neq 1
\end{aligned}
$$

Hence it is composite, so we do not need to make further checks.

### [Miller-Rabin Test](https://crypto.stanford.edu/pbc/notes/numbertheory/poly.html)

Most widely used test for generating large prime numbers. It is guaranteed to detect composite numbers of the test is run sufficiently many times.

*Modular square root of $1$*: a number $x$ such that $x^2 \mod n = 1$. In other words, the root of the equation $x^2 - 1 \equiv 0 \bmod n$.

There are four square roots of $1$ when $n = pq$ (i.e. composite):

- Two are $1$ and $-1$
- Two are called *non-trivial* square roots of $1$

If $x$ is a non-trivial square root of $1$ then $\mathrm{gcd}(x - 1, n)$ is a non-trivial factor of $n$. Hence, $n$ must be composite.

#### Miller-Rabin Algorithm

Let $n$ and $u$ be odd and find $v$ such that $n - 1 = 2^v u$. Then:

1. Pick $a$ at random such that $1 \lt a \lt n - 1$
2. Set $b = a^u \mod n$
3. If $b = 1$, return *probable prime*
4. For $j = 0$ to $v - 1$:
    - If $b = -1$, return *probable prime*
    - Else, set $b = b^2 \mod n$
5. Return *composite*

If the test returns probable prime, $n$ *may* be composite.

If $n$ is composite then then test returns *probable prime* with at most a probability of $0.25$.

As the algorithm is run $k$ times, it outputs *probable prime* when $n$ is composite with a probability of no more than $0.25^k$.

In practice, the error probability is smaller: when $a$ is given the first seven primes, the smallest composite the algorithm returns as being a *probable prime* is $341,550,071,728,321$

#### Why The Miller-Rabin Test Works

Given a random $a$ such that $0 \lt a \lt n - 1$, with $n - 1$ being equal to $2^v u$.

Hence, $b$ can be given the values $\{ a^u \mod n, a^{2u} \mod n, \dots, a^{2^{v}u} \mod n \}$.

Each number on the sequence is the square of the previous number (modulo $n$).

If $n$ is prime, $a^{2^v u} \mod n = a^{n - 1} = 1$ (Fermat's theorem). Hence:

- Either $a^u \mod n = 1$ OR
- There is a square root of $1$ somewhere in the sequence whose value is $-1$ (which is equal to $n - 1$

If a non-trivial square root of $1$ is found, $n$ must be composite.

#### Example

Let $n = 1729$ (a Charmichael number)

$n - 1 = 1728 = 64 \times 27 = 2^6 \times 27$. Hence, $v = 6$, $u = 27$.

1. Choose $a = 2$
2. $b = 2^{27} \bmod{1729} = 645$
3. $b \neq 1$ so:
    - $b = 645^2 \bmod n = 1065$
    - $b = 1065^2 \bmod n = 1$
    - $b = 1^2 \bmod n = 1$
    - $\dots$
    - Hence, $b = -1 = n - 1$ will never occur
    - Hence, $n$ must be composite

NB: $1064$ is a non-trivial square root of $1$ modulo $1729$: $\mathrm{gcd}(1729, 1064) = 133$ is a factor of $1729$.

#### Example 2

Let $n = 17$.

$n - 1 = 16 = 2^vu$.

$16 = 2^5$ and $u$ must be odd. Hence, the only valid values are $u = 1$ and $v = 5$.

Let $1 < a < n - 1$ be a prime. Pick $a = 3$:

- $b = a^u \bmod n = 3^1 \bmod 17 = 3$
- This is not $1$ so:
- Repeat up to $v = 5$ times:
  - $b = 3^2 \bmod{17} = 9$
  - $b = 9^2 \bmod{17} = 13$
  - $b = 13^2 \bmod{17} = 16 = -1$

Hence, $17$ is a *probable* prime. Repeat for other values of $a$ until satisfied.

#### Generation of Large Primes

1. Choose a random odd integer $n$ of the same number of bits as the required prime
2. Test if $r$ is divisible by any of a small list of primes
3. If not:
    - Apply the Miller-Rabin test five random or fixed based values of $a$
    - If $r$ fails any test, set $r = r + 2$ and return to step 2

This incremental method does not produce completely random primes. If this is an issue start from step 1 if $r$ is found to be composite.

## Basic Complexity Theory

Two aspects:

- **Algorithmic complexity**: how long does it to take to run a particular algorithm
- **Problem complexity**: how long does it to take to run *the best known algorithm* for the given problem

Express this complexity using 'big O' notation; in terms of the space and time required to solve the problem for a given size.

### Hard Problems

Integer factorization: given an integer of $m$ bits, find its prime factors.

Discrete logarithm problem (base 2): given a prime $p$ of $m$ bits and an integer $0 \lt y \lt p$, find $x$ such that $y = 2^x \mod p$

There are no known polynomial algorithms to solve the problems; the best known algorithms are *sub-exponential*.

## Factorization Problem

Trial by division: exponential time algorithm

Some fast methods exist, although they only apply to integers with particular properties.

Bets known general method: *number field sieve*, a sub-exponential algorithm.

As $n = pq$, $n$ is large even with small keys; brute force search of 128-bit AES keys takes roughly the same computational effort as factorization of a 3072-bit number with two factors of roughly equal size.

## Discrete Logarithm Problem

Given a prime $p$ and generator $g$ of $\mathbb{Z}_p^*$, the discrete logarithm is:

> Given $y \in \mathbb{Z}_p^*$, find $x$ such that $y = g^x \bmod p$.

(i.e. find the power given the remainder)

This can be written as $x = log_g(y) \pmod p$.

If $p$ is large enough, the problem is *hard*. Given the same length, the security level is equal RSA (and hence should be at least 2048 bits).

### Example

Find $x$ such that $2^x = 3 \bmod 5$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
1&: 2^1 \bmod 5 = 2 \\
2&: 2^{2} \bmod 5 = 4 \bmod 5 = 4 \\
3&: 2^{3} \bmod 5 = 8 \bmod 5 = 3 \\
\end{aligned}
$$

Hence $x = 3$.

### Example 2

Find the discrete logarithm of the number $4$ with regard to base $2$ for the modulus $p = 7$.

i.e. solve $2^x = 4 \bmod 7$.
$$
\begin{aligned}
1&: 2^1 &\equiv 2 &\pmod 7 \\
2&: 2^2 \equiv 2 \cdot 2 &\equiv 4 &\pmod 7 \\
3&: 2^3 \equiv 4 \cdot 2 \equiv 8 &\equiv 1 &\pmod 7 \\
4&: 2^4 \equiv 1 \cdot 2 &\equiv 2 &\pmod 7 \\
5&: 2^4 \equiv 2 \cdot 2 &\equiv 4 &\pmod 7
\end{aligned}
$$
There is a cycle with powers of $2$ modulo $7$ taking on the values $2, 4, 1$. Hence, $x = 2$.
