# 10. Public Key Cryptography

Public key cryptography (PKC) has some features that symmetric key cruptography (SKC) does not and is applied for key management in protocols such as TLS and IPsec.

Discrete log-based ciphers are alternatives to PKC.

## One-Way Functions

A function is one-way if $f(x) = y$ is easily computed given $x$, but $f^{-1}(y) = x$ is hard to computed given $y$.

It is not known if one-way functions exist, but there are many functions that are believed to be one-way:

- Multiplication of large primes: the inverse function is integer factorization
- Exponentiation: the inverse function takes discrete logarithms

### Trapdoor One-Way Functions

A function such that $f^{-1}(y)$ is easily computed given additional information, called a *trapdoor*. Example:

- Modular squaring: given $n = pq$ where $p$ and $q$ are two large primes, $f(x) = x^2 \bmod n$
- If an algorithm takes square roots (i.e. computes $f^{-1}$) then it can be used to factorize $n$
- The trapdoor is the factorization of $n$: if it is known then there is an efficient algorithm to find square roots

### Asymmetric Cryptography

Another word to describe public key cryptography.

Public key cryotosystems, such as the Diffie-Hellman key exchange, are designed by using a trapdoor one-way function: the trapdoor is the decryption key.

This allows a public key to be stored in a public directory: anyone can obtain the public key and use it to form an encrypted message that only a person with the private key can decrypt.

Asymmetry: encryption and decryption keys are different. Encryption key is *public* and known to anybody; the decryption key is *private* and known only to its owner.

Finding the private key from the public key must be a hard computational problem.

Advantages of shared key/symmetric cryptography:

- Key management is simplified: they dot not need to be transported confidentially
- Digital signatures can be obtained

## RSA

Designed in 1977 by Rivest, Shamir, and Adleman from MIT (patent expired 2000).

It is based on integer factorization problem.

### Algorithm

Key generation:

- Randomly choose two distinct primes, $p$ and $q$ from the set of all primes of a certain size
- Compute $n = pq$
- Randomly choose $e$ such that $\mathrm{gcd}(e, \phi(n)) = \mathrm{gcd}(e, (p - 1)(q - 1)) = 1$
- Compute $d = e^{-1} \bmod \phi(n)$
- Set the public  key $K_E = (n, e)$
- Set the private key $K_D = (p, q, d)$

Encryption:

- Input is value $M$ such that $0 < M < n$
- Compute $C = \mathrm{Enc}(M, K_E) = M^e \bmod n$

Decryption:

- Compute $M = \mathrm{Dec}(C, K_D) = C^d \bmod n$

Any message must be pre-processed:

- Coding it as a number
- Adding randomness (to avoid repeating ciphertext for the same plaintext)

#### Numerical Example

Key generation:

- Let $p = 43$, $q = 59$
- $n = pq = 2537$
- $\phi(n) = (p - 1)(q - 1) = 2436$
- Let $e = 5$
  - $d = e^{-1} \bmod \phi(n) = 5^{-1} \bmod 2436 = 1949$
    (Solve $ed + k'\phi(n) = 1$ using the Euclidean algorithm)

Encryption:

- Let $M = 50$: $C = M^e \bmod n = 50^5 \bmod 2537 = 2488$

Decryption:

- $C^d \bmod n = 2488^{1949} \bmod 2537 = 50 = M$

#### Correctness

Decrypting an encrypted message: does $(M^e)^d \bmod n = M$?

As $d = e^{-1} \bmod \phi(n)$, $ed \bmod \phi(n) = 1$: this can be written as being some integer $k$ such that $ed = 1 + k\phi(n)$.

Hence, $(M^e)^d \bmod n = M^{ed} \bmod n = M^{1 + k\phi(n)} \bmod n$.

Now we must show that $M^{1 + k\phi(n)} \bmod n = M$. There are two cases:

##### Case 1: Coprime to *n*

$\mathrm{gcd}(M, n) = 1$. In this case, we can apply Euler's theorem, $M^{\phi(n)} \bmod n = 1$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
M^{1 + k\phi(n)} \bmod n &= M \cdot (M^{\phi(n)})^k \bmod n \\
                         &= M \cdot 1^k \bmod n \\
                         &= M
\end{aligned}
$$

##### Case 2: Multiple of *p* or *q*

$\mathrm{gcd}(M, n) \neq 1$. $p$ and $q$ are primes and $M < pq$, so either $\mathrm{gcd}(M, p) = 1$ or $\mathrm{gcd}(M, q) = 1$.

Supposing that $\mathrm{gcd}(M, p) = 1$, $\mathrm{gcd}(M, q) = q$ and hence, there is some integer $l$ such that $M = lq$.

Applying Fermat's theorem, $M^{\phi(p)} \bmod p = M^{p - 1} \bmod p = 1$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
M^{1 + k\phi(n)} \bmod p &= M \cdot (M^{\phi(n)})^k \bmod p
                         &= M \cdot (M^{p - 1})^{(q - 1)k} \bmod p
                         &= M \cdot (1)^{(q - 1)k} \bmod p
                         &= M \bmod p
\end{aligned}
$$

As $M = lq$ $M^{1 + k\phi(n)} \bmod q = 0$. As $n = pq$ and $p$ and $q$ are primes, we can use the Chinese Remainder Theorem:

- There is a unique solution $x = M^{1 + k\phi(n)} \bmod n$ to:
  - $M = M^{1 + k\phi(n)} \bmod p$
  - $M = M^{1 + k\phi(n)} \bmod q ( = 0)$
  - Hence, $x = M$
- And $M = M^{1 + k\phi(n)$ \bmod n$ is satisfied too

### Applications

- Message encryption
- Digital signature
- Distribution of key for symmetric key encryption (hybrid encryption)
- User authentication

### Implementation

A few implementation details

#### Key generation:

Generating large primes $p$ and $q$:

- At least 1024 bits recommended for today
- Simple algorithm: select random odd number $r$ of required length, check if prime, incrementing by two if not

Choice of $e$:

- Choose at random for best security
- But small values are often used in practice: more efficient
- $e = 3$ is smallest possible value; very fast but has security issues
- $e = 2^{16} + 1$ is a popular choice
- $d$ should be at least $\sqrt{n}$

#### Encryption/decryption

##### Fast Exponentiation

A square-and-multiply modular exponentiation algorithm.

In binary, $e = e_0 2^0 + e_1 2^1 + \dots + e_k 2^k$, where $e_i$ are bits.

If $M$ is the plaintext: $M^e = M^{e_0} + (M^2)^{e_1} + \dots + (M^{2^k})^{e_k}$

Pseudo-code:

 ```js
let z = 1; // becomes M^e \bmod n
for(let i = 0; i < k; i++) {
  if(e[i] == 0) { 
    // e is array, LSB first
    z = (z * M) % n;
  } else {
    M = (M * M) % n;
  }
}
 ```

Cost:

- If $2^k \le e \lt 2^{k + 1}$ the algorithm uses $k$ squarings
- If $b$ bits of $e$ are high, there are $b - 1$ multiplications (first computation has z = z * M, but $z$ is initially one)
- $n$ is 2048 bits so $e$ is at most 2048 bits. Hence, computing $M^e \bmod n$ requires at most 2048 modular squarings or multiplications
- On average, only half of $e$'s bits are high so there are only 1024 multiplications


##### Faster Decryption Using CRT

Decrypting $C$ with respect to $p$ and $q$ separately.

Compute $M_p = C^{d \bmod (p - 1)} \pmod p$
and     $M_q = C^{d \bmod (q - 1)} \pmod q$

Solve $M \bmod n$ using CRT. $d = (d \bmod (p - 1)) + k(p - 1)$ for some $k$. Hence:

$$
\begin{aligned}
M \bmod p &= C^{d \bmod n} \bmod p = C^d \bmod p \\
          &= C^{d \bmod (p - 1)} C^{k(p - 1)} \bmod p = C^{d \bmod (p - 1)} \\
          &= M_p
\end{aligned}
$$

Hence, $M \equiv M_p \bmod p$ and similarly, $M \equiv M_q \bmod q$.

Then we can output $M = q\cdot (q^{-1} \bmod p) \cdot M_p + p \cdot (p^{-1} \bmod q) \cdot M_q \bmod n$.

###### Speedup

Exponents $d \bmod (p - 1)$ and $d \bmod (q - 1)$ are about half the length of $d$ and the complexity of exponentiation with square-and-multiply increases with the cube of input length.

Hence, computing each of $M_p$ and $M_q$ uses about an eigth of the computation, leading to four times less computation.

Hence, storing $p$ and $q$ instead of just $n$ allows for faster decryption.

#### Padding

Encryption directly on the message encoded as a number is bad as it is vulnerable to attacks:

- Building up a dictionary of known plaintexts
- Guessing the plaintext and checking if it encrypts to the ciphertext
- Håstad's attack

Hence, a padding mechanism must be used to prepare the message for encryption, adding redundancy and randomness.

##### Håstad's Attack

The same message $M$ is encrypted without padding to three different ciphertexts $C_1$, $C_2$, $C_3$ with the public exponent $e = 3$ being used by all recipients.

$$
\begin{aligned}
C_1 = M^3 \bmod n_1 \\
C_2 = M^3 \bmod n_2 \\
C_3 = M^3 \bmod n_3 \\
\end{aligned}
$$

Equations can be solved using the CRT to obtain $M^3$ in the ordinary (non-modular integers). The attacker can then simply take the cube root to find $M$.

##### Padding Types

- PKCS 1: simple ad-hoc design
- Optimal asymetric encryption padding (OAEP):
  - Bellaware and Rogaway, 1994
  - Security proof in a suitable model
  - Standardized in IEEE P1363

### Security

#### Attacks

Mostly avoided through the use of standardized padding mechanisms.
