# 11. Digital Signatures

MACs allow entities with shared secrets to generate valid tags, providing data integrity and authentication.

Digital signatures use public key cryptography to provide additional properties: only the owner of a private signing key can generate a valid signature.

Non-repudiation: the signer cannot deny they have signed a message.

## Properties

Algorithms: Key & signature generation, signature verification.

Key generation algorithm outputs a private signing key, $K_S$ and public verification key, $K_V$.

Signature generation: $s = \mathrm{Sig}(M, K_S)$, where $M$ is a message of any length to sign. Only the owner should be able to generate a valid signature. The signature is usually a fixed size (and if there are multiple possible signatures for the same message, they will all be the same length).

Signature verification: $\mathrm{Ver}(M, s, K_V)$ outputs true or false.

**Correctness**: if $s = \mathrm{Sig}(M, K_S)$, then $\mathrm{Ver}(M, s, K_V) = \mathrm{true}$ (for matching $K_S and K_V$

**Unforgeability**: computationally infeasible to generate signature for any message without key. Note that the signing algorithm may be randomized - many possible signatures for a message.

Stronger security definition: forging a new signature should be difficult even if they can obtain signatures for messages of their choice (chosen message oracle).

### Security Goals

Key recovery: recovering the private signing key $K_S$ fom the public verification key $K_V$ and some known signatures.

Selective forgery: choosing a message and obtaining a signature for that message.

Existential forgery: forging a signature on *any* message not previously signed (even a meaningless message).

Modern digital signatures should be able to resist existential forgery under a chosen message attack.

## RSA Signatures

### Key Generation

Key generation is the same as for encryption keys:

- Public verification key: $n$, $e$ where $n$ is the product of two large primes $p$ and $q$
- Private signing key: $p$, $q$, $d$ such that $ed \bmod \phi(n) = 1$

A fixed public parameter, the hash function $h$, is also required (e.g. SHA-256).

### Signature Generation and Verification

Given message $M$, modulus $n$ and private exponent $d$, the signature is $s = h(M)^d \bmod n$. $(M, s)$ is the signature.

Given claimed signature $(M, s)$, modulus $n$ and public exponent $e$, check if $S^e \bmod n = h(M)$

## Discrete Logarithm Signatures

Three versions:

1. Original Elgamal signatures in $\mathbb{Z}_p^*$ (1985)
2. Digital signature algorithm (DSA) standardized by NIST
3. DSA based on elliptic curve groups: ECDSA

### Elgamal Elements in $\mathbb{Z}_p^*$

- $p$ is a large prime
- $g$ is a generator of $\mathbb{Z}_p^*$
- $x$ is the private signing key, where $0 < x < p - 1$
- $y = g^x \bmod p$ is part of the public key
- A message $m$ in $0 < M < p - 1$

$p$, $g$ and $y$ form the public verification key.

Signature generation:

- Pick random $k$ such that $\mathrm{gcd}(k, p - 1) = 1$
- Compute $r = g^k \bmod p$
- Solve $M = xr  + ks \bmod(p - 1)$ for $s$:

     $$
     s = k^{-1}(M - xr) \bmod(p - 1)
     $$
- Output the tuple $(M, r, s)$

Signature verification: check if

$$
g^M \equiv y^r r^s \bmod p
$$

## Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA)

Published by NIST in 1994. Based on Elgamal signatures but calculations are simpler and signatures shorter: done in  a subgroup of $\mathbb{Z}_p^*$ or an elliptic curve group. Also prevents attacks Elgamal signatures were vulnerable to.

Prime $p$ chosen such that $p - 1$ has a prime divisor $q$ that is much smaller.

Generator $g$ from Elgamal signatures is replaced by:

$$
g = h^{\frac{p - 1}{q}} \bmod p
$$

where $h$ is a generator.

$g$ has order $q$ as $g^q \bmod p = 1$ (by Fermat's theorem, $g^q \bmod p = \left(h^\frac{p - 1}{q}\right)^q \bmod p = h^{p - 1} \bmod p = 1$).
Hence, all exponents can be reduced modulo $q$ before exponentiation.

Let $H$ be a standard SHA hash algorithm such that the output is $N$ bits long (the same size as $q$).

$g^{H(M)} \equiv y^r r^s \bmod p$ so rearranged, we get the verification equation:

$$
\left(g^{H(M)}\right)^{s^{-1}} \left(y^{-r}\right)^{s^{-1}} \equiv r \pmod p
$$

Both sides of the equation are reduced modulo $q$.

$p$ is a $L$-bit long prime modulus, $q$ a $N$ bit long a prime divisor of $p - 1$. There are several approved combinations for $(L, N, \text{Hash fn})$: $(1024, 160, \text{SHA-1})$, $(2048, 224, \text{SHA-224})$, $(2048, 256, \text{SHA-256})$, $(3072, 256, \text{SHA-256})$. The first option may be insecure.

Key generation:

- Choose secret key $0 < x < q$
- Compute the public key, $y = g^x \bmod p$.

Signature generation:

- Message $M$
- Pick $0 < k < q$
- Compute $r = \left(g^k \bmod p \right) \bmod q$
  - Why $\bmod q$?
- Compute $s = k^{-1}(H(M) - xr) \bmod q$
- Set the signature as $(M, r, s)$

Signature verification:

- Check if $0 < r < q$, $0 < s < q$
- Compute $w = s^{-1} \bmod q$
- Compute $u_1 = H(M)w \bmod q$
- Compute $u_2 = rw \bmod q$
- Check that $\left(g^{u_1} y^{-u_2} \bmod p \right) \bmod q = r$

Verification equation is the same as with Elgamal except that all exponents and the final result is reduced modulo $q$. Signature size is also smaller at $2N$ bits.

### Elliptic Curve DSA (ECDSA)

Similar except that:

- $q$ becomes the order of the elliptic curve group
- Multiplication modulo $p$ is replaced by the elliptic curve group operation
- After operations on group elements, only the $x$ coordinate is kept from the pair $(x, y)$

Compared to DSA, public keys are shorter but signatures are not (326 to 1142 bits).
