# 12. Public Key Infrastructure and Certificates

## Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)

NIST: *"… key management environment for public key information of a public key cryptographic system"*

Must consider:

- Key lifecycle: generation, distribution, storage and destruction
- Trusted legal/business entities:
  - Registration Authorities (RAs): vouch for the identify of a user
  - Validation Authorities (VAs): verify identities
  - Certification Authorities (CAs): issue digital certificates (certifying public key TODO?)

## Digital Certificates

How do you confirm the relationship between the public key and the claimed owner of that key?
Through the use of *digital certificates*:

- Contain public key and owner identity
- Metadata such as signature algorithm, validity period

Certificates are signed by a certification authority (that should be trusted by the certificate verifier).

### Certification Authority

A CA creates, issues and revokes certificates for subscribers and other CAs.

A CA has a *certification practice statement* (CPS) which covers processes such as checks before issuing certificates, physical/procedural security controls, revocation processes.

### X.509 Certificate

Now RFC 5280, currently on version 3.

Important fields:

- Version number
- Serial number
- Signature algorithm identifier
- Issuer name (CA name)
- Subject name (user to which the certificate is issued)
- Public key information
- Validity period
- Digital signature (generated by CA)

Verification:

- Check CA signature is valid
  - Requires user to have public key of the CA
- Check any conditions set in the certificate (e.g. validity period) are correct

Certification paths: CAs can issue certificates to other CAs. Hence, as long as there is a chain of CAs leading to a trusted root CA, the last CA can be trusted and hence the certificate can be validated.

Phishing: attacker can make URL and interface similar to a genuine site

Extended validation certificates: certificate issued by only some CAs after they have validated the entity's legal identity. Different icon in browsers, but mostly ignored by users.

Revocation:

- Certificate marked as invalid even if its validity period is current
- User must check which certificates have been revoked
- Certificate Revocation List (CRL): each CA issues list of revoked certificates that must be downloaded by clients
- Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP): server responds to requests about specific certificates

Public Key Pinning:

- Depreciated feature that allowed websites to tell browsers to fix the public key used to verify certificates
- If CA was compromised, attacker can issue another certificate for the website but the browser would continue to use the pinned key for some time period

### PKI Examples

Hierarchical PKI:

```
   R           Root
  / \
 /   Y Intermediate
A     \         CAs
       Z
      / \
      B  C    Users
```

CA certifies public key of entity below. If non-hierarchical, certification can be done between any CAs.

Browser PKI:

- Multiple hierarchies with preloaded public keys as root CAs
- Intermediate CAs can be added
- Users can add their own certificates
- Most servers send their public key and certificate through TLS

OpenPGP PKI:

- Used in PGP emails
- Certificate includes ID, public key, validity period, self-signature
- NO certification authorities
- Various key servers store public keys
- *Web of trust*: users can attest to association between public key and username
