# 13. Key Establishment

Distribution of cryptographic keys to protect subsequent sessions. In TLS, public keys allow clients/servers to share a new communication key.

Kerberos: key establishment without public keys.

## Key Management

Key management has four phases:

- Key generation: keys should be generated such that they are all equally likely to occur
- Key distribution: keys should be distributed in a secure fashion
- Key protection: keys should be accessible only to authorized parties
- Key destruction: once a key has performed its function, it should be destroyed such that it (TODO the encrypted data?) has value to an attacker

## Hierarchy

Keys often organized into a hierarchy. In a two-level hierarchy, there are long- and short-term keys:

- Long-term/static keys are used to protect the distribution of session keys. They may last anywhere from a few hours to a few years, depending on the application
- Short-term/session/ephemeral keys are used to protect communications in a session. They may last anywhere from a few seconds to a few hours, depending on the application

## Key Establishment

Symmetric keys with ciphers (e.g. AES, MAC) are used in practice for session keys as as they are more efficient than public key algorithms.

Long-term keys can be symmetric or asymmetric.

### Key Distribution Security Goals

**Authentication:** they should be able to authenticate that the receiver is the party they intended to send the key to.

**Confidentiality**: no adversary can obtain the session key accepted by a particular party.

In formal models, the protocol is broken if the adversary can distinguish the session key from a random string.

### Mutual and Unilateral Authentication

*Mutual authentication*: both parties achieve the authentication goal.

*Unilateral authentication*: only one party achieves the authentication goal. This is done by most real-world key establishment protocols: typically clients authenticate the server with client authentication happening later.

### Adversary Capabilities

A strong adversary knows the details of the cryptographic algorithms and can:

- Eavesdrop on all messages
- Alter messages sent
- Re-route messages to any other party
- Obtain the session key used in any previous run

### Distribution of Pre-Shared Keys

A **trusted authority** (TA) generates and distributes long-term keys to all users when they join the system. Their involvement ends here in the pre-distribution phase so if there are no new users they can go offline.

A simple scheme is to assign a secret key for each pair of users, but this will not scale well as the number of keys grows quadratically.

*Probabilistic schemes* reduce key material at each party by forwarding messages to other parties that hopefully have a link to the final receiver. Hence, it offers only a high probability of a secure channel between any two parties and requires other nodes to be trusted as they must decrypt and re-encrypt the message. This is suitable for sensor networks.

### Key Distribution using Symmetric Keys

Key distribution with online server.

A TA shares a long-term shared key with each user. They distribute session keys to users when requested and hence, the TA is highly trusted and is a single point of attack. Scalability may also be a problem.

#### Needham-Schroeder Protocol

Widely-known key establishment protocol published 1978. Found vulnerable to replay attacks in 1981 - attacker can replay old messages that a honest party will accept an old session key.

Notation:

- Two parties, $A$ and $B$
- TA $S$
- $A$ and $S$ share a long-term key $K_{AS}$
- $B$ and $S$ share a long-term key $K_{AS}$
- New session key $K_{AB}$ generated by $S$
- Nonce $N_A$, $N_B$ randomly generated by $A$ and $B$ respectively for one-time use
- $A \to B: M$: $A$ sends message $M$ to $B$
- $\{M\}_K$: message $M$ encrypted using key $K$. There is assumed to be some authentication mechanism

Protocol:

1. $A \to S: \mathrm{ID}_A, \mathrm{ID}_B, N_A$
2. $S \to A: \left\{ K_{AB}, \mathrm{ID}_A, \mathrm{ID}_B, N_A, \left\{ K_{AB}, \mathrm{ID}_A, \mathrm{ID}_B \right\}_{K_{BS}} \right\}_{K_{AS}}$
3. $A \to B: \left\{ K_{AB}, \mathrm{ID}_A, \mathrm{ID}_B \right\}_{K_{BS}}, \mathrm{ID}_A$
4. $B \to A: \{ N_B \}_{K_{AB}}$
5. $A \to B: \{ N_B - 1 \}_{K_{AB}}$

##### Replay Attacks

If an attacker $C$ gets a previous session key $K'_{AB}$, they can masquarade as $A$ and persuade $B$ to use the old key (steps 3-5).

To defend against this, the established key must be **fresh** for each session:

- Random challenges (nonces)
- Timestamps
- Counters

The repaired protocol uses random challenges. After $A$ establishes request for connection with $B$:

1. $B \to A: \mathrm{ID}_B, N_B$
2. $A \to S: \mathrm{ID}_A, \mathrm{ID}_B, N_A, N_B$
3. $S \to A: \left\{ K_{AB}, \mathrm{ID}_A, \mathrm{ID}_B, N_A \right\}_{K_{AS}}, \left\{ K_{AB}, \mathrm{ID}_A, \mathrm{ID}_B, N_B \right\}_{K_{BS}}$
4. $A \to B: \left\{ K_{AB}, \mathrm{ID}_A, \mathrm{ID}_B, N_B \right\}_{K_{BS}}$

Tickets can also be used: if $A$ wishes to communicate with $B$, $S$ generates ticket $\left\{ K_{AB}, \mathrm{ID}_A, \mathrm{ID}_B, T_B \right\}_{K_{BS}}$ where $T_B$ is a validity period - $A$ can use the ticket for this duration.

1. $A \to S: \mathrm{ID}_A, \mathrm{ID}_B, N_A$
2. $S \to A: \left\{ K_{AB}, \mathrm{ID}_A, \mathrm{ID}_B, N_A \right\}_{K_{AS}}, \text{ticket}$
3. $A \to B: \text{ticket}$

#### Kerberos

Now on V5, released 1995. Standardized as RFC 4120. Used in Windows as the default domain authentication method.

Kerberos allows:

- Secure network authentication service in an insecure network
- Single sign-on: users only need to enter their username/password once per session
- Access to different online services using individual tickets
- Session keys to be established in an authenticated and confidential fashion

It is a 3-level protocol:

##### Level 1

Client $C$ interacts with authentication server $AS$ to obtain a ticket-granting ticket at the start of a session.

$$
\begin{aligned}
C  \to AS&: \mathrm{ID}_C, \mathrm{ID}_{TGS}, N_1 \\
AS \to  C&: \left\{ K_{C, TGS}, \mathrm{ID}_{TGS}, N_1 \right\}_{K_{C}}, \text{ticket}_{TGS}
\end{aligned}
$$

Where:

- $K_C$ is the symmetric key shared between $AS$ and $C$, usually generated on login from $C$
- $K_{C, TGS}$ is the symmetric key generated by the AS
- $N_1$ is the nonce generated by $C$ to ensure $K_{C, TGS}$ is fresh
- $K_{TGS}$ is the long-term key shared between $AS$ and $TGS$
- $\text{ticket}_{TGS} = \{ K_{C, TGS}, \mathrm{ID}_C, T_1 \}_K{_{TGS}}$ is valid for some validity period $T_1$.

At the end of this exchange, $C$ has a ticket-granting ticket that can be used to obtain different service-granting tickets from the ticket-granting server.

##### Level 2

Client $C$ interacts with ticket granting server $TGS$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
C   \to TGS&: ID_V, N_2, \text{ticket}_{TGS}, \text{authenticator}_{TGS} \\
TGS \to C  &: ID_C, \text{ticket}_V, \{ K_{C, V}, N_2, \mathrm{ID}_V \}_{K_{C, TGS}}
\end{aligned}
$$

Where:

- $K_{C, V}$ is a session key shared between $V$ and $C$
- $N_2$ is a nonce
- $\text{ticket}_V = \left\{ K_{C, V}, \mathrm{ID}_C, T_2 \right\}_{K_{C, TGS}}$ is a ticket for service $V$ with validity period $T_2$
- $\text{authenticator}_{TGS} = \left\{ \mathrm{ID}_C, TS_1 \right\}_{K_{C, TGS}}$ where $TS_1$ is a timestamp
  - The ticket-granting server must check that the timestamp is valid

The ticket-granting server must also check that the client has permission to access the service $V$.

In practice, the AS and TGS are the same machine.

##### Level 3

$$
\begin{aligned}
C \to V&: \text{ticket}_V, \text{authenticator}_V \\
V \to C&: \left\{ TS_2 \right\}_{K_{C, V}}
\end{aligned}
$$

Where:

- $\text{authenticator}_V = \left\{ \textrm{ID}_C, TS_2 \right\}_{K_{C, V}}$

The reply from $V$ is intended to provide mutual authentication, allowing $C$ to verify they are talking to the right $V$.

##### Limitations

Realms (domains over which an authentication server has authority to authenticate a user) must share keys with every other realm, so although multiple realms are supported it has limited scalability.

$K_{C}$ is derived from the user's password, so offline password guessing is possible.

### Key Distribution using Asymmetric Cryptography

No online TA is required. Instead, public keys (managed by PKI - certificates and CAs) is used for authentication. Users are trusted to generate good session keys (so hopefully each party has a good PRNG).

*Key transport*: user chooses key material and sends it to another party (encrypted, possibly signed). Does NOT provide forward secrecy.

*Key agreement*: Diffie-Hellman or some other protocol where both parties provide input to the key. The messages are signed, providing authentication. Provides forwards secrecy.

TLS supports both key transport and agreement.

#### Forward Secrecy

If a long-term key is compromised, the attacker can now claim to be the owner of the key. **If key transport is used, all previous session keys will be compromised.**

A protocol provides (perfect) *forwards secrecy* if compromise of the long-term secret keys do not reveal session keys previously agreed using the long-term keys.

#### Signed Diffie-Hellman

Computations done in $\mathbb{Z}_p^*$. Notation:

- Generator $g$
- Random values $a$ and $b$ chosen by each party where $1 \le a, b \le p - 1$
- $\mathrm{Sign}_A(m)$ is a signature on message $m$ from $A$ signed with their signing/long-term key
- $\mathrm{Sign}_B(m)$ is a signature on message $m$ from $B$ signed with their signing/long-term key
- $\mathrm{ID}_A$ and $\mathrm{ID}_B$ are $A$ and $B$'s identities respectively
- Both parties know each other's public verification key
- Long-term signing keys provide only authentication, hence it has perfect forward secrecy

Protocol:

1. $A$ sends $\mathrm{ID}_A$, $g^a$
2. $B$ sends $\mathrm{ID}_B$, $g^b$ and $\mathrm{Sign}_B(\mathrm{ID}_A \| \mathrm{ID}_A \| g^b || g^a)$
    - $A$ checks signature. If valid, computes session key $K_{AB} = (g^b)^a = g^{ab}$
3. A sends $\mathrm{Sign}_B(\mathrm{ID}_A \| \mathrm{ID}_B \| g^a || g^b)$
    - $B$ checks signature. If valid, computes session key $K_{AB} = (g^a)^b = g^{ab}$


<!--
Common approaches to establishing secret session keys using long-term keys: 

- Key pre-distribution of long-term keys by a trusted authority TODO 48min
- Using an online server with symmetric long-term keys
- Usin assymetric long-term keys
-->

