# 14. Transport Layer Security Protocol

The most widely used security protocol.

History:

- SSL 2.0 developed by Netscape in 1994, 3.0 in 1995
- Standardized as RFC 2246 in 1999, called TLS 1.0
- TLS 1.1 (4346) in 2006, fix issues with non-random IVs, weaknesses from padding
- (the below are good to use)
- TLS 1.2 (5246) in 2008 allows standard authenticated encryption
- TLS 1.3 (8446) in 2018 had major changes and separated key agreement and authentication algorithms

## Overview

Three higher-level protocols:

- TLS handshake protocol
- TLS alert protocol signals events
- TLS change cipher spec protocol for changing cryptographic algorithm (not available in TLS 1.3)

TLS record protocol provides basic services to the higher-level protocols. Stack:

```
|----------------------------------------|
| TLS       | TLS change |  TLS  | HTTP/ |
| Handshake |   cipher   | alert | Other |
|----------------------------------------|
|           TLS record protocol          |
|----------------------------------------|
|                  TCP                   |
|----------------------------------------|
|                  IP                    |
|----------------------------------------|
```

## TLS Record Protocol

TLS offers:

- Message confidentiality - message contents cannot be read in transit
- Message integrity - receiver can detect modifications made to the message in transit

These services may be provided by a symmetric encryption algorithm (confidentiality) and MAC (authentication/integrity).
TLS 1.2 and above offer authenticated encryption modes (CCM, GCM), combining these two services into one.

The handshake protocol establishes the symmetric session keys used by the record protocol.

The record protocol also deals with dividing messages into blocks and re-assembling received blocks and possibly with compressing/decompressing block contents.

### Format

```
                HEADER
|--------------------------------------|
| Content |  Major  |  Minor  | Length |
|  type   | version | version |        |
|--------------------------------------|

          ENCRYPTED CONTENTS
|--------------------------------------|
|              Plaintext               |
|        (possibly compressed)         |
|      (not available in TLS 1.3)      |
|--------------------------------------|
|                 MAC                  |
|  (unless authentication encryption)  |
|--------------------------------------|
```

Content type can be `change-cipher-spec`, `alert`, `handshake` or `application-data`.

TLS 1.3 does not allow the cipher suite to be changed to prevent downgrade attacks - a new session must be created.

Major version is `3` for TLS and minor version `1` to `4` for TLS 1.0 to 1.3.

Length of data is in octets.

### Operation

- Each application-layer message is $2^{14}$ bytes or less
- Compression removed in TLS 1.3 after attacks discovered, null by default in TLS 1.2
- Authenticated data: data, header and implicit record sequence number
- Plaintext: data and MAC (unless using authenticated encryption)
- Session keys: established in handshake protocol
  - One key for each of MAC and encryption for each direction
  - A single key if using authenticated encryption
- Specification: encryption/MAC algorithms specified in negotiated cipher suite

MAC algorithm:

- SHA-2 allowed in TLS 1.2 and above
- MD5 and SHA-1 not supported in TLS 1.3

Encryption algorithm:

- Block cipher in CBC or a stream cipher
- Most common block cipher is AES
- 3DES and RC4 not supported in TLS 1.3
- For block ciphers, padding is applied after the MAC to get complete blocks

Authenticated encryption algorithm:

- Allowed instead of separate encryption and MAC algorithms in TLS 1.2 and above
- TLS 1.3 supports only AES with either CCM or GCM modes
- Authenticated data in header and implicit record sequence number

## TLS Handshake Protocol

For:

- Negotiating the TLS version and cryptographic algorithms used
- Establishing a shared symmetric session key for use in the record protocol
- Authenticating the server and optionally authenticating the client

Many variations supported - many were dropped to in TLS 1.3.

### Phases

- Phase 1: initiating the logical connection and establishing the capabilities of the partner
- Phases 2 and 3: performing the key exchange
  - Operation depends on the handshake variant negotiated in phase 1
- Phase 4: completing setup

### Cipher Suites

Specify the public key algorithms used for key establishment and symmetric algorithms used for authenticated encryption/key computation.

There were over 300 standardized cipher suites, many of which were discarded in TLS 1.3.

TLS 1.3 requires cipher suites to be Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD). AEAD means that there is some associated data that must be sent in plain text (not confidential) but should be authenticated - for example, sequence numbers and other header information.

e.g. TLS_RSA_WITH_3DES_EDE_CBC_SHA:

- Mandatory in TLS 1.0/1.1
- RSA for key exchange
- 3DES in CBC mode for encryption (confidentiality)
- SHA-1 for HMAC (data integrity)

Handshake algorithms:

- DHE-DSS: Diffie-Hellman key Exchange with Digital Signature Standard/Algorithm (TLS 1.2 only)
- DHE-RSA: Ephemeral Diffie-Hellman with RSA signatures (TLS 1.2/1.3)
- ECDHE-RSA: Elliptic Curve DHE with RSA signatures (TLS 1.2/1.3)
- ECDHE-ECDSA: Elliptic Curve DHE with Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (TLS 1.2/1.3)

Record algorithms:

- AES-CBC-SHA256: AES in CBC mode, SHA256 HMAC (TLS 1.2)
- AES-GCM: AES in GCM mode for authenticated encryption (TLS 1.2/1.3)
- CHACHA20-POLY1305: ChaCha stream cipher with Poly1305 MAC (TLS 1.2/1.3)

Forwards Secrecy:

- Compromise of a long-term key should not lead to compromise of session keys established prior to the compromise
- Diffie-Hellman handshakes offer forwards secrecy, but RSA-based handshakes do not. Hence, TLS 1.3 drops support for static RSA

#### Handshake

- Phase 1: client/server negotiate TLS version, cipher suite and compression, and exchange nonces
- Phase 2: server sends certificate and key exchange message (if required by cipher suite)
- Phase 3: client sends certificate and key exchange message (if required by cipher suite)
- Phase 4: secure communications. Finished messages also includes check value of all previous messages

Client hello (phase 1):

- Highest TLS version supported
- Cipher suites supported
- Client nonce $N_C$

Server hello (phase 1):

- Selected TLS version and cipher suite
- Server nonce $N_S$

Server key exchange (phase 2):

- Server inputs to key exchange

Client key exchange (phase 3):

- Client inputs to key exchange

Change cipher suite (phase 4):

- Use negotiated cipher suite for record layer

#### Ephemeral Diffie-Hellman Handshake Variant

Server key exchange; server sends:

- Diffie-Hellman generator
- Group parameters (e.g. $P$)
- Server's ephemeral Diffie-Hellman value

The response is signed by the server using their private key. The client must check this.

Client key exchange; client sends their ephemeral Diffie-Hellman value. Signed if the client has their own certificate.

**Pre-master secret** ($\text{pms}$) is the shared Diffie-Hellman secret that both parties have computed from the key exchange.

Steps:

1. Client hello: TLS version, supported cipher suites, client nonce $N_C$
2. Server hello: server certificate, chosen cipher suite, server nonce $N_S$
3. Server signature: $N_C$, $N_S$ and server's DH parameter signed using server private key
4. Client checks server sinature, sends client's DH parameter
5. Pre-master secret calculated using DH parameters
6. Session keys computed with PRF 
7. Client finished message: encrypted with session key
8. Server finished message: encrypted with session key

#### RSA Handshake Variant

1. Client hello: TLS version, supported cipher suites, client nonce $N_C$
2. Server hello: server certificate, chosen cipher suite, server nonce $N_S$
3. Client checks server certificate
4. Pre-master secret key transport: client randomly chooses pre-master secret $\text{pms}$, encrypted with server's public key
5. Session keys computed with PRF
6. Client finished message: encrypted with session key
7. Server finished message: encrypted with session key

#### Other Handshake Variants

Diffie-Hellman: static/fixed Diffie-Hellman with certified keys. If the client does not have a certificate, they use an ephemeral Diffie-Hellman key.

Anonymous Diffie-Hellman: ephemeral Diffie-Hellman, but keys are not signed at all - only protects against passive eavesdropping.

### Session Key Generation

Master secret $\text{ms}$ generated using the pre-master secret and a pseudorandom function $\mathrm{PRF}$:

$$
\text{ms} = \mathrm{PRF}(\text{pms}, \text{\textquotedblleft master secret\textquotedblright}, N_C \| N_S)
$$

The $\text{pms}$ to $\text{ms}$ conversion is required to ensure the $\text{ms}$ is in the right format as $\text{pms}$ may vary depending on the key transfer algorithm.

To generate the key material (the amount depends on cipher suite):

$$
k = \mathrm{PRF}(\text{ms}, \text{\textquotedblleft key expansion\textquotedblright}, N_C \| N_S)
$$

Independent session keys are partitioned from $k$ in each direction; a write key and a read key are used on each side.

Depending on cipher suite, key material ma include encryption key, MAC key and IV.

The $\mathrm{PRF}$ is built from a HMAC specified by the TLS standard - SHA-2 in TLS 1.2 and a combination of MD5 and SHA-1 in TLS 1.0/1.1.

e.g. for TLS 1.2:

$$
A(i) = \begin{cases}
  \text{nonce},                        & i = 0 \\
  \mathrm{HMAC}(\text{key}, A(i - 1)), & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathrm{PRF}(\text{key}, \text{label}, \text{nonce}) =

  & \mathrm{HMAC}(\text{key}, A(1) \| \text{label} \| \text{nonce}) \| \\
  & \mathrm{HMAC}(\text{key}, A(2) \| \text{label} \| \text{nonce}) \| \\
  & \vdots
\end{aligned}
$$

## TLS Alert Protocol

Alert messages of varying degrees of severity:

- Warning alerts
- `close_notify` alerts
- Fatal alerts

If alert messages are handled improperly, users may be vulnerable to truncation attacks.

## Attacks

### Backwards Compatibility

Insecure versions of TLS are depreciated slowly:

- SSL 3.0 was depreciated in 2015
- End-of-life for TLS 1.0 and 1.1 was in 2020

TLS 1.2 is secure as long as a good cipher suite is used:

- RC4 shown to be vulnerable, offered in TLS 1.2

TLS 1.2 supported by 99.5% of websites, TLS 1.3 (released 2018) ~50% as of August 2021. See [SSL Pulse](https://www.ssllabs.com/ssl-pulse/) for up-to-date statistics.

### BEAST (Browser Exploit Against SSL/TLS)

Exploits non-standardized IV use in CBC mode encryption: IVs are chained from previous ciphertexts; attack could recover plaintext byte-by-byte.

Theoretical attack found in 2002 but required the full block to be guessed. In 2011 researchers found a method where they could have all but one byte in the block to be known, requiring only that byte to be guessed.

TLS 1.1 requires random IVs, and most browsers added mitigation strategies by putting only one byte of data in the first block (and padding the rest with random data) and the remaining bytes into the second block, forcing a randomized IV.

### CRIME (Compression Ratio Info-leak Made Easy) and BREACH (Browser Reconnaissance and Exfiltration via Adaptive Compression of Hypertext)

Side channel attacks based on compression: different inputs result in different amounts of compression.

CRIME is based on compression in the TLS level, BREACH on compression at the HTTP level.

CRIME: attacker has ability to control part of request. If request gets smaller, the attacker-controlled content is probably matches part of source content (e.g. cookies).

TLS 1.3 does not allow compression. Disabling compression at a HTTP level results in a large performance hit.

### POODLE (Padding Oracle On Downgraded Legacy Encryption)

A *padding oracle* enables an attacker to know if a message in a ciphertext was correctly padded.

Encryption in CBC mode can provide a padding oracle due to its error propagation properties: servers (after decrypt all blocks and validating the padding) may sometimes return an 'invalid padding' error.

Main mitigation is to have a uniform error response so that attacker cannot distinguish between padding and MAC errors.

Theoretical in 2002, practical in 2014 with POODLE, which forced a downgrade into SSL 3.0.

### Heartbleed

Implementation error in OpenSSL found in 2014: improper input validation due to missing bounds check in heartbeat messages allowed memory leakage.

Heartbeats allow clients/servers to send a few bytes of data that the partner should echo back: OpenSSL did not validate that the length field matched actual length of the heartbeat, so the allocated memory could include freed data that contained sensitive data (e.g usernames/passwords, private keys).

### Other Attacks

- Man-In-The-Middle (MITM)
  - Found in 2015, Lenovo was bundling Superfish spyware in their computers, which including a self-signed root certificate that used the same private key across devices
- STARTTLS command injection
- Sweet32
- Triple Handshake
- RC4 attacks
- Lucky Thirteen
- Renegotiation

## TLS 1.3

Drafted 2014, adopted as RFC 8446 in August 2018.

TLS 1.3 did a large spring cleaning, removing:

- Static RSA, Diffie-Hellman key exchange
- Cipher-suite renegotiation
- SSL negotiation
- DSA
- Data compression
- Non-AEAD (authenticated encryption with associated data) cipher suites
  - AEAD is more efficient, secure, require less keys and are easier to implement compared to separate encryption and MACs algorithms.
- MD5, SHA-335 hash functions
- Change Cipher Spec protocol

TLS 1.3 also added:

- Separation of key agreement and authentication algorithms from cipher suites
- Mandating perfect secrecy: ephemeral keys during EC Diffie-Hellman key agreement
- Encrypting content type
- 0-RTT mode (using pre-shared key)
- Post-handshake client authentication
- ChaCha20 stream cipher with Poly1305 MAC

[Handshake](https://tls13.ulfheim.net/):

1. Client hello:
  - TLS version, supported cipher suites
  - Key share:
    - Guesses selected cipher suite (s), sends key share (s)
    - If guess was wrong, server sends retry hello request
2. Server hello:
  - Selected TLS version, cipher suite
  - Key share
    - Everything after this in the handshake can be encrypted
  - Server certificate (and optionally the certificates up the chain)
  - Hash of handshake messages signed with server certificate
3. Client handshake finished
  - Hash of handshake messages signed with session key

### 0-RTT Overview

Even faster handshakes using pre-shared key (resumption master secret) obtained for the purpose of 0-RTT after a previous (and recent) connection.

TLS 1.3 1-RTT (with ephemeral Diffie-Hellman key exchange):

- Client hello
- Server hello plus:
  - Diffie-Hellman key share
  - Encrypted extensions
  - Certificate
  - Key to verify certificate
- Client response:
  - Diffie-Hellman key share
  - Certificate
  - Verifhadication data

TLS 1.2 1-RTT session resumption:

- Client hello plus:
  - Diffie-Hellman key share
  - Pre-shared key (from previous connection after handshake)
- Server hello
  - Diffie-Hellman key share
  - Encrypted extensions

TLS 1.3 0-RTT:

- Client hello:
  - Key share
  - Application data encrypted with resumption key negotiated previously
  - End of early data alert
- Server hello:
  - Key share
  - Application data encrypted with session key
- Client handshake finished:
  - And more application data
- Further messages encrypted with new session key

Limitations:

- Attackers can capture encrypted 0-RTT and re-send them to the server: if the server is misconfigured, it may accept the replayed requests
