# 1. Algorithms

A well-defined procedure:

- Input: instance of the problem
- Output: solution to the instance

The procedure must work for all instances of the problem.

## Defining Algorithms

- English
- Pseudo-code
- Program
- Formal mathematical notation
The further down you go, the more precise but less readable it gets.

## Properties

- **Correctness** (for a defined set of inputs)
  - Don’t write clever code! Write correct code
- Scalability/Efficiency
  - Time, RAM, disk, CPU, power etc.
- Clarity
- Generality
  - Is it sufficient for it to work on a subset of problems? Then redefine the problem space
  - Is an optimal solution required, or does it just have to be good-enough?

## Determining Correctness

Testing can not prove an algorithm is correct (unless you can test all cases): you can only prove it is incorrect. Only formal proofs can prove it. Not covered in the course.

Start with a reasonably precise statement of the problem and algorithm.

Then:

- Find failing cases
- Try proof by induction
  - Can you test every single case when the size is small?

### Example: Robot Arm (Skiena 1.1)

Robot needs to place solder into $n$ points on a PCB. What is the shortest cycle tour that visits each point in the set $S$?
This is the TSP, so an optimal solution cannot be found. Thus, heuristics need to be used.

Heuristics: greedy algorithm?

### Example: Selecting Jobs (Skiena, 1.2)

Multiple movies that need to be filmed, need to maximize number of movies. Set $I$ of $n$ intervals on the line.

Heuristics: start with the shortest movie? Start with the first available movie?

**Look for counter examples that show that the heuristic is incorrect**:

- Think small
- Think exhaustively
- Find weaknesses
  - Ties
  - Extremes

## Proof by induction

```python
def sum(n):
    s = 0
    for i in range(1, n + 1):
        s += i
    return s
```

Assume that the loop works up to $k$. Thus, the loop must work up to  when calculating the sum for $k+1$.

### Insertion sort

After $n$ iterations of the outer for loop, the sub array, $[0, n)$ is sorted. Now, you only need to prove that it is able to sort the $n$th element correctly.
