# 03. Sprint 1 Retrospective

## How well did you estimate

TODO:

- Jira, retro
- Revised backlog published
  - Grooming, risk analysis, estimation
  - Prepare for Monday planning
  - Clarify story description, ACs

Risk estimation: mitigate avoid high probability, high impact risks.

## Meetings

Meetings are expensive; avoid where possible.

When required:

- Create a shared agenda document with specific questions that should be answered
- Write down answers and discuss if necessary on Discord etc.
- At meeting, discuss points that were written down, decision, action points, who is responsible
  - Each **item should be time-boxed**; give someone the role of **time-keeper**
  - This becomes your meeting minutes

## Retrospective

Retrospectives should be a safe space.

If you want to say something negative about a team but feel uncomfortable with it, remember that we want the team and everyone in the team to do as well as they can; giving negative feedback is a means to improve.

The key goal: figure out how to make the next sprint better.

Ask:

- What went well; make this explicit so that everyone in the team understands what was helpful
- What didn't go (so) well; anchors that stopped you from going forwards

Write down one item per post-it note (ensures everyone has a say), then categorize them into topics.

At this point, begin discussions and come up with five or so **action items**. They should be:

- Specific
- Measurable
- Achievable
- Realistic
- Time-boxed

Make sure everyone can see the action items and after every standup, **review the action items**.
