# 07. Engineering Management 4 - Leading

Process of building enthusiasm and directing effort towards the organization's goal.

## Models of Leadership

Trait:

- Leaders are born
- Use tests to select good leaders
- Focus on personal traits

Behavioral:

- Leaders are made
- Train people to be good leaders
- Focus on what leaders do

Contingency:

- Links traits and behaviors to situations in which they best apply

## Traits

### Kirkpatrick and Locke

- Drive:
  - Desire for achievement
  - Ambition
  - Energy
  - Tenacity
  - Initiative
  - Leadership motivation: desire for power to make change
- Key traits:
  - Drive
  - Leadership motivation
  - Honesty and integrity
  - Self-confidence
  - Cognitive ability
  - Knowledge of business
  - Creativity, charisma and flexibility did not show any effect

### Goleman's Emotional Intelligence Theory

Five critical components of emotional intelligence:

- Self-awareness: ability to understand your own mood, etc. and ensure or mitigate the impacts it has on others
- Self-regulation: controlling disruptive impulses, emotions etc.
- Motivation to lead for reasons other than money, status etc.
- Empathy: ability to understand emotions of others and relate to them
- Social skill: ability to build a rapport with people, network etc.

## Behavioral Theories

Specific behaviors differentiate leaders from non-leaders. There are no 'born leaders'; leaders can be trained, although to varying success - training someone that does not want to lead to lead will be difficult.

Two aspects:

- Concern for the task
- Concern for the people doing the work

### Drucker

A good leader will:

- Ask what needs to be done
- Ask what is right for the enterprise
- Develop action plans
- Took responsibility for decisions, communication
- Focused on opportunities, not problems
- Ran productive meetings
- Said 'we', not 'I'

### Black Mouton Leadership Grid

Quadrant with two axes: concern for people and concern for people

- Low concern for production/people
  - Impoverished manager: minimum effort to get the job done
- Low concern for production, high concern for people
  - Country club manager: focus on people's needs and building relationships
- High concern for production, low concern for people
  - Authority-obedience manager: focus on efficiency of operation
- High concern for production/people
  - Team manager: focus on building commitments to shared purpose

Middle-of-the-road: balances with output with morale.

## Contingency Theories

Considers characteristics from leaders, follows and that of the situation.

Harvard Business Review survey shows a mixture of traits and behaviors are required:

- High ethical/moral standards (trait/behavior)
- Self-organizing; provides goals/objectives with loose guidelines (behavior)
- Clearly communicates expectations (behavior)
- Flexibility with changing opinions (trait)

### Hersey-Blanchard Situational Leadership Model

Quadrant with two axes: support required (relationship behavior) and guidance required (task behavior):

- Delegation: followers able, willing and confident
- Telling (give instructions): followers unable, unwilling and insecure
- Participating (share ideas): followers able but unwilling and insecure
- Selling (explaining decisions): followers unable but willing and confident

### Fielder's Contingency Model

- Leader-member relations: does the member have a good or bad relationship with the the leader?
- Task structure: how structured are the tasks?
- Power position: to what degree to which leader can reward/punish members

Depending on these three characteristics the amount of situational control they have and the preferred leadership style, task- or relationship-oriented, changes.

### House's Path-Goal Theory

Effective leaders clarify paths through which followers can achieve the goal.

Depending on the situation, leaders should be:

- Directive
- Supportive
- Achievement-oriented
- Participatory

This is dependent on the follower's:

- Ability
- Experience
- Locus of control: how much they feel what they do makes a difference

As well as the environment's:

- Task structure
- Authority system
- Work group

## Team Management vs Leadership

These two terms may or may not be used interchangeably.

| Management                    | Leadership                                              |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- |
| Direct using positional power | Guide, influence and collaborate using relational power |
| Maintain                      | Develop                                                 |
| Focus on systems/structure    | Focus on relationships                                  |
| Rely on control               | Inspire trust                                           |
| Near-term goals               | Long-range vision                                       |
| Ask how/when                  | Ask what/why                                            |
| Focus on bottom-line          | Focus on horizon                                        |
| Accept status quo             | Challenge status quo                                    |
| Do things right               | Do the right things                                     |
| Focus on operational issues   | Focus on vision, motivation                             |
