# 09. Engineering Management 5b - Group Decision Making

## Vroom-Jago Leader-Participation Model

- Who has the information: leaders or followers?
- Is acceptance critical for implementation: no or yes?
- Time pressure for decision making: high or low?

The former options favours authority decisions, the latter group decisions. Consultative decisions are in between the two extremes.

### Vroom-Yetton-Jago Group Decision Styles

Autocratic/Authority Decisions:

- A-I: make the decision yourself based on information available to you
- A-II: obtain information from subordinates, but decide your self

Consultative Decisions:

- C-I: share problem with relevant subordinates individually, getting their information and suggestions. Make the decision your self
- C-II: share problem with subordinates as a group and collectively obtain their views. Make the decision your self

Collaborative/Group Decisions:

- G-II: share problem with group together, acting as facilitator: group generates and evaluates alternatives and chooses by consensus

## Managing Group Decision Making

For managed teams, the **manager** clarifies the choice.

For self-leading teams, the **team** clarifies the decision making process: authority, majority, consensus, unanimity.

### Delegation

Another option is **delegation**: share the problem with subordinate(s) and support their decision. The appropriateness of this depends on the nature of the task and skills of the subordinate(s).

Good delegation requires:

- Agree on a performance timetable
- Give performance feedback
- Recognize and reinforce progress
- Help when things go wrong

#### Four Quadrant Delegation

- Q1: I decide
- Q2: I ask for your input, then I decide
- Q3: I ask for your input, then we decide
- Q4: You decide, and I'll support you

Leaders must be explicit in the choice of quadrant and follow through on their choice.

### Advantages and Disadvantages

Advantages:

- More knowledge and information available
- More alternatives can be considered
- Greater understanding and acceptance of decision
- Members develop skills

Disadvantages:

- Time consuming (and therefore more costly)
- Disagreements may cause delay and hard feelings
- Discussion may be dominated by a few members
- Group dynamics may cause members to overemphasize gaining consensus: groupthink can compromise decisions
  - See the Challenger disaster: management overruled concerns after facing pressure from NASA to launch
  - [Analysis by Jeff Forrest](http://dssresources.com/cases/spaceshuttlechallenger/index.html)

Irving Janis; symptoms of groupthink:

- Illusion of invulnerability
- Belief in group morality
- Rationalization
- Stereotyping
- Self-censorship
- Illusion of unanimity
- Mind guards; mental protections against seeing how bad things really are
- Pressure to agree

Avoiding groupthink:

- Promote an open climate
- Avoid isolation of the team
- Appoint critical evaluators
- Avoid being too directive/authoritative
