# 10. Engineering Management 6 - Planning

Planning consists of:

- Defining specific desirable outcomes
- Establishing strategies to achieve those
- Defining a comprehensive hierarchy of actions, from broad to specific

## Mission

Reason for the organization's existence.

Good mission statements should include:

- Customers
- Products/services
- Location
- Underlying philosophy

Missions should serve the organization's stakeholders well.

Values: broad beliefs about what is or not appropriate. The culture reflects the dominant value system (e.g. profit, environmental sustainability) of the organization as a whole.

## Goals vs Objectives

Goals:

- End result of planned activities; often broad
- Can be without time and quantification

Objectives:

- Goals or sub-goals with specific results to be determined by specific times i.e. SMART:
  - Specific: details specific results
  - Measurable: can quantify success
  - Achievable: those responsible for implementing it accept the objective
  - Realistic: possible to achieve the objective
  - Time-box: clear time period to complete the objective by
- Several objectives may be set up to achieve a single goal

Warning: anything that isn't measured regresses; if you don't set what you are measuring correctly, meeting the metrics does not necessarily mean helping the mission.

## Types of Plans

Strategic plans: organization wide plans; **establish overall objectives** and position the organization in terms of its environment. Strategic plans are:

- Long term: beyond five years
- Directional: flexible plans that set out general guidelines only

Operational plans: plans that specify details on how to achieve overall objectives. Operational plans are:

- Short term: less than a year
- Specific: clearly defined with no room for interpretation

### Types of Operational Plans

Single-use plans:

- Tactics
- Operational objectives
- Projects and programs
- Budgets; plans that commit resources to projects or activities

Standing plans:

- Methods
- Rules
- Policy: broad guidelines for decisions and actions
- Procedures: actions to be taken in specific situations in a recommended sequence of events

### Planning Process

1. Define objectives
2. Determine current state relative to objectives
3. Develop premises regarding future conditions
4. Analyze and choose among alternatives
5. Implement the plan and evaluate results

### Strategic Planning

- Where are we now?
  - Current mission, objectives, strategies
- What environment are we in?
  - Industry and external environment
  - Organizational resources and capabilities
- Where do we want to go?
  - Revise mission/objectives, select new strategies
- What is required to close the gap?
- How can we make it happen?

## Controlling

Determining if an organization is actually progressing towards its goals/objectives and taking corrective action if not. Involves:

- Measuring results against objectives
- Monitoring performance relative to standards
- Rewarding outstanding performance
- Taking corrective action
