# 13. Intellectual Property

## Introduction

Virgina Nichols from New Zealand Intellectual Property Office.

Intellectual property: any fruit of the human intellect.

<!-- It includes:

- Anything you branding
- Anything you create: write or draw
- Anything you design: if you identify a need and a way to meet the need
- Anything you dream: new invention
- Anything you develop: improvements you make

-->

IP is a catch-all term that includes:

- Internal processes
- Customer lists and contact details
- Licensed rights
- Trade marks
- Corporate branding
- Copyright
- Formal IP assets: patents, designs, registered trade marks, plant variety rights, geographical indications (e.g. Waipara Valley)

## Importance of IP

IP:

- Provides competitive advantages
- Allows businesses to produce better products
- Allows businesses to have more popular branding
- Allows businesses to have cheaper production methods

~90% of the value of the business can be its IP.

Engineers are paid predominantly to produce IP.

## IP Strategy

An IP strategy is important for businesses to:

- Be able to leverage their IP to earn money
- Block competitors
- Avoid legal infringement risk

## IPONZ

IPONZ helps businesses, both domestic and international protect the IP rights in NZ. They:

- Impartial administrators of relevant legislation
- Registers particular IP rights after examination
- Provides general information regarding IP

They examine, grant and register IP rights under the:

- Patents Act 2013
- Trade Marks Act 2000
- Designs Act 1953
- The Geographical Indications Registration Act 2006
- Plant Variety Rights Act 1987

Registered Trans Tasman patent attorneys have specialist qualifications and interact with IPONZ and overseas office on their clients behalf.

## Types of IP

Many types including but not limited to:

- Trade secrets/confidential information
- Patents: protection of new products and processes
- Copyright: anything you write/draw/say
- Designs
- Trade Marks
- Plant Varieties

### Patents

Gives you the exclusive right to stop others from making, using, selling, importing, marketing or licensing your invention for up to 20 years. To own a patent, you must have acquired that right from each and every inventor.

This right is granted by the government in exchange for **full disclosure of the invention**. The right only exists in each country/region where the patent is granted - you must get protections in every country/region. There is usually a maximum duration of 12 months between starting the patent process and having to decide which countries it will be patented to (Patent Cooperation Treaty).

If it can be easily reverse-engineered, a patent is likely to be useful. If it is a black box, a trade-secret may be more suitable.

Patents are assets and hence can be bought, sold, licensed or transferred.

Patents are attractive to investors as it demonstrates technical competence, gives licensing opportunities, is useful as a marketing tool (e.g. "our patented system...").

Patents protect *how things work*: function, not form. This makes it particularly relevant to engineers.

Patents can be granted for:

- New products
- A new process of manufacturing
- Improvements to existing products or processes
- New methods or processes relating to the testing or control of an existing manufacturing process
- Improvements in computer technology, but not software
- New chemical compounds
- Electrical devices and circuits

An provisional patent specification can be submitted to buy time for a complete specification (12 months, extendable to 15 months) before requesting an examination within five years. Within about three months IPONZ will examine the patent, after which there can be a back and forth with the examiner to respond to issues. 

#### Computer Programs

In New Zealand, computer programs are not inventions *"to the extent that it relates to a computer as such."*

That is, if the contribution made by the alleged invention lies solely in it being a computer program, it is not an invention.

Fisher and Paykel exception: created a new and improved way of operating a washer machine to get clothes cleaner and use less electricity. The invention isn't the software but the improved operation of the washing machine.

In determining if it is an invention, the Commissioner or court considers:

- The substance of the claim and the actual contribution it makes
- What problem/issue is being solved or addressed
- How the relevant product/process solves or addresses the problem/issue
- The advantages/benefits of solving/addressing the problem/issue in that matter
- And any other matters they believe are relevant

Laws related to computer programs vary by country and change over time.

### Māori Advisory Committee

Advises if the invention claimed in the patent application is derived from Māori traditional knowledge or from indigenous plants or animals and if so, whether the commercial exploitation is likely to be contrary to Māori values.

### Main Legal Requirements

Patents must be:

- **Novel**: never have been done or written about before
- **Inventive**: can't be obvious in the light of what has been done before
  - From the perspective of someone in the industry
- **Useful**: must be specific, credible and have substantial utility
  - Doesn't usually come up; if it isn't useful, people won't try and patent it

#### *"Keep it secret; keep it safe"*

The number one rule for patents. A patent application must be filed **before**:

- Any non-confidential disclosure
- Before sales (or offers for sale)
- Commercial use

There are exceptions e.g. can patent up to six months after disclosing in a gazetted exhibition.

The Comprehensive and Progressive Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (CPTPP) introduced a grace period of one year. However, this is NOT recognized in most other jurisdictions.

Keeping it secret: legal action can be taken if *information of a confidential quality* is *disclosed under an obligation of confidence* and they attempt to make *unauthorized use* of it. Written agreements are the best evidence of this (e.g. non-disclosure/confidentiality/secrecy agreements). Note: NDAs may have extra clauses related to ownership, which should be considered separately.

The default position is that if you are employed to create IP, your employer will own it. A good employment contract will have clauses relating to this.

### Licensing

You need a license any time you use someone else's IP: just because it is available on the internet does not mean you have permission to use it.

Accessing IP as a licensee:

- Get permission to use it; they may require payment of a royalty
- Negotiate access to support and improvements
- Licensing may be bundled with other supply agreements
- There should be enforcement against third parties to prevent unauthorized use
- Licenses may be exclusive or non-exclusive
- Must be able to terminate the license after patent expiry

Commercializing IP as a licensor:

- Allows access to new markets; new revenue stream to allow expansion and scale
- May allow cross-licensing and collaboration

### Copyright

Copyright automatically projects original works such as artwork, computer programs, written work, and music.

Its protects the **particular *expression* of the idea**, not the underlying idea.

Copyright works fall into one of several categories:

- Artistic works: works of artistic craftsmanship e.g. paintings, drawings, photography, engraving, plans, buildings etc.
- Dramatic works: dance, film scripts
- Literary works: anything written, including tables and computer programs
- Musical works
- Sound recordings
- Films

Copyright *ownership agreements* must be in writing, but copyright protection itself is free and automatic (in New Zealand).

This relies on internal record keeping. Files can be lost or overwritten easily so physical printouts may be useful. Proving infringement requires evidence of:

- When it was created
- Where it was created
- Who created it
- Who owns it

If there is evidence of an **independent design process**, you can defend against infringement. Unlike patents, copyright is about *copying* the idea, so coming up with the idea independently does not breach copyright.

Industrial Copyright (NZ only):

- No artistic merit required
- Examples: sheep dip jetters, asparagus grader, denim jeans
- 16 years from commercial use
- Requires good record keeping: copies of every version of the design, dates, authors

The copyright symbol © may be useful as a deterrent, indicating that you are aware of your rights.

Issues:

- 'Fair dealing': standards vary by country
- No 'percentage rule'
  - There is no safe amount you can change a work by
  - There is copyright infringement if there is objective similarity in a qualitatively substantial part of the work; a copy is a copy if it looks like a copy
  - However, there must be a 'causal connection': independent works do not infringe

### Design Rights

Design: new or original shape, configuration, pattern or ornament applied to an article by any industrial process or means.

In New Zealand, designs protect *eye appeal*, not function (this would fit under industrial copyright in NZ) e.g. shape of containers, chairs, spa pools, cars etc..

Design rights are filed with IPONZ, have a novelty requirement and provide up to 15 years of protection (although most aren't renewed past five years - the design is old by that point).

### Trade Marks

Signs that distinguish your goods and service in the marketplace from those of other people.

Trade marks include works, logos, pictures, shapes, sounds, smells, colours, animations, and position marks.

Trade marks to avoid:

- Descriptive terms (including Māori words with a descriptive meaning)
- Common names
- Place names
- Jargon
- Offensive words or spelling

Google it, do trade mark checks (IPONZ database), or professional searches before developing a new brand.

Trade mark strategy:

- Identify trade marks
- Risk analysis: registration comes at a cost, so figure out if it is worth stopping competitors from copying it
- Exporters/overseas manufacturers: always register to ensure the manufacturer does not register it for themselves
