# 14. Engineering Economic Analysis 1

Time is money: a dollar today is worth more than a dollar tomorrow.

## Interest

## Simple/Fixed Interest

Present value $\mathrm{PV} = 1000$, deposit it at a bank at yearly interest rate (or rate of return or growth rate) $i = 1%$.

Future value at time $t$:

$$
\mathrm{FV}_t = \mathrm{PV}(1 + it)
$$

(this module ignores tax)

This can be shown in a cash flow diagram:

```
1000    1010   1020             FV_t
  |------|-------|-------|--...--|
t 0      1       2       3       t 
  PV
```

Cash outflows are negative values; cash inflows are positive. The point of view matters: depositing money (-ve) and receiving it later (+ve) is different from borrowing money (+ve) and returning it later (-ve).

### Compounding Interest

#### Annual Compounding Interest

$$
\mathrm{FV}_t = \mathrm{PV} \cdot (1 + i)^t
$$

$(i + 1)^t$ is called the **future value factor**.

#### Varying Compounding Interest Periods

If the compounding interest period is not a year, a modified formula is required. Let $m$ be the number of compounding periods in a year:

$$
\mathrm{FV}_t = \mathrm{PV} \cdot \left(1 + \frac{i}{m} \right)^{mt}
$$

The larger the value of $m$, the larger the interest.

The *effective* annual interest rate (EAR) can also be calculated:

$$
\mathrm{EAR} = \left(1 + \frac{i}{m}\right)^m - 1
$$

NB: in the test, round to the nearest dollar and percentages to the nearest basis point (0.01%).

##### Continuous Compounding Interest Rule

Limiting case when $m$ tends to infinity:

$$
\mathrm{FV}_t = \mathrm{PV} \cdot e^{it}
$$

### Future Value of Multiple Uniform Cash Flows: Annuity

A series of equally spaced, level cash flows that occurs over a finite number of periods.

Disbursements begin at end of period 1 and continue to the end of the period (maturity date).

$$
\mathrm{FV}_\mathrm{annuity} = C\left[\frac{(1 + i)^t - 1}{i} \right]
$$

where $c$ is the annual disbursement, $i$ the interest rate and $t$ the number of years.

### Present Value and Discounting

$$
\begin{aligned}
           \mathrm{FV}_t &=       \mathrm{PV} \cdot (1 + i)^t \\
\therefore \mathrm{PV}   &= \frac{\mathrm{FV}_t}   {(1 + i)^t}
\end{aligned}
$$

The term $(1 + i)^{-t}$ is the **present value/discount factor**.

$i$ is called the **discount rate** in this context.

e.g. you need to pay $x$ in $t$ years. Your bank account as an interest rate of $i$. How much do I need to have now?

#### Present Value of Uniform Multiple Cash Flows (Annuity)

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathrm{PV}_\textrm{annuity} = \sum_{t = 1}^n\frac{C_t}   {(1 + i)^t}
\end{aligned}
$$
Where $C_t$ is the cash flow at time $t$. Since it is an annuity the value is constant.

For a geometric series whose $n$th term is $T_n = ar^n$ where $a$ is the initial value, the sum of the first $n$ values is:

$$
S_n = \frac{a(1 - r^n)}{1 - r}
$$

Therefore, $r = \frac{1}{1 + i}$ and $a = \frac{C}{1 + i}$ (TODO $1 + i$ because there is no $t_0$?):

$$
\begin{aligned}
S_n = \mathrm{PV}_\text{annuity} &= \frac{C}{i + 1} \cdot \frac{1 - \frac{1}{1+i}^t}{1 - \frac{1}{1+i}} \\
&= \frac{C}{i + 1} \cdot \frac{1 - \frac{1}{(1+i)^t}}{\frac{1+i}{1+i} - \frac{1}{1+i}} \\
&= \frac{C}{i + 1} \cdot \frac{1 - \frac{1}{(1+i)^t}}{\frac{1+i}{1+i} - \frac{1}{1+i}} \\
&= \frac{C}{i + 1} \cdot \frac{1 - \frac{1}{(1+i)^t}}{\frac{i}{1+i}} \\
&= C \cdot \frac{1 - \frac{1}{(1+i)^t}}{i} \\
\end{aligned}
$$

Hence, the formula for the present value of an annuity is:

$$
\mathrm{PV}_\mathrm{annuity} = C \left[\frac{1 - \frac{1}{(1 + i)^t}}{i} \right]
$$

##### Example: Buying House

\$450,000 house, \$50,000 deposit, borrowing the rest at 6.00% fixed interest rate over 30 years, compounding monthly.

$$
\begin{aligned}
C &= \frac{i \cdot \mathrm{PV}_\mathrm{annuity}}{1 - \frac{1}{(1 + i)^t}} \\
C &= \frac{\frac{0.06}{12} \cdot $400,\!000}{1 - \frac{1}{(1 + \frac{0.06}{12})^{12 * 30}}} \\
C &= $2,398
\end{aligned}
$$

#### Present Value of Uniform Multiple Cash Flows (Annuity) with Constant Growth

Annuity grows by a constant rate each period. Only valid where $r > g$:

$$
\mathrm{PV}_\text{growing annuity} = \frac{C}{r - g}\left[1 - \left(\frac{1 + g}{1 + r}\right)^t  \right]
$$

For future value:

$$
\mathrm{FV}_\text{growing annuity} = C \left[\frac{(1 + r)^t - (1 + g)^t}{r + g}  \right]
$$

##### Example: Land Lease

20 year lease, \$100,000 decontamination afterwards.

NPAT (net profit after tax) of \$100,000 in first year, average growth rate $g = 5.00\%$ per annum. Cost of capital $r$ is $10.00\%$.

What is the present value of the cash flows?

``` 
        100K   105K  110.25K    265.33K - 100K
  |------|------|------|-----...-----|
t 0      1      2      3             20
```

<!--

### Aside: Opportunity Cost

Interest rates, $i$ are one form of rate of return.

Opportunity cost, $r$, is the maximum value you can gain 
-->

