# 18. Financial and Management Accounting 2 - Management Accounting

## Cost Concepts

A technique for determining the cost of a project.

### Manufacturing Costs

Raw materials, work-in-progress and finished goods. Inventory size determined by:

- Demand
- Lead time and production process
- Nature of goods
- Supply chain management (e.g. JiT)

### Fixed Costs

Costs that do not vary with output e.g. rent, depreciation, lighting and supervisor salaries.

Usually they are only fixed over a certain range of production - the *relevant range*. Factors such as requiring bigger warehouses limit the range.

### Variable Costs

Cost that vary with output:

- Direct materials
- Direct labour

Usually a linear function of quantity.

### Total Cost

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathrm{TC}(x) &= \mathrm{VC}(x) + \mathrm{FC} \\
               &\approx mx + c
\end{aligned}
$$

Where $x$ is quantity.

Total costs can be calculated through several methods:

- Job costing (for one-off jobs)
  - Sum cost of raw materials materials, labour, overhead, etc.
- Process costing (for mass production lines)
  - Sum costs of individual processes per batch
  - Does not include cost of raw materials, overhead, shipping etc.
- Standard costing (for large manufacturers producing different products but with some sort of standard costing)
  - Cost per unit output established in advance of production/service delivery
  - Establish standards of work (e.g. worker can pack x products/minute) then calculate time and hence cost to pack some unit of product (e.g. container)
  The above are all CPV methods - cost-volume-profit. Activity based costing, which tracks hidden overhead costs to the activities that cause them, is not covered.

### Costing Terminology

```
  ┌─            Direct  ───┐  ─────┐  ─────┐
  │            Material    │       │       │
  │                        │       │       │
  │                     Prime      │       │
  │        ┌──  Direct   Cost      │       │
  │        │    Labor      │     Cost      │
  │        │               │   of Goods    │
  │        │               │ Manufactured  │
  │        │   Indirect ───┤       │       │
  │        │   Material    │       │     Cost
  │Conversion              │       │   of Goods
  │  Costs │               │       │     Sold
  │        │   Indirect  Factory   │       │
  │        │    Labor   Overhead   │       │
Selling    │               │       │       │
 Price     │               │       │       │
  │        │    Fixed/     │       │       │
  │        └──  Misc    ───┤  ─────┘       │
  │                        │               │
  │             General/   │               │
  │              Admin    Non-Factory      │
  │                        Overhead        │
  │            Selling/    │               │
  │            Marketing  ─┘  ─────────────┘
  │
  │
  └─             Profit
```

- Prime costs: AKA direct costs
- Fixed/misc: electricity, rent etc.
- Indirect material: cleaning supplies, glues etc. that aren't allocated on a per-unit basis
- Selling price (SP): price each unit is sold at
- Total revenue (TR): selling price times units sold
  - Not all units produced may be sold
- Profit (P): revenue after deducting relevant costs

### Price-Demand Relationship

Law of Demand: inverse price-quantity relationship (price rising reduces quantity demanded). Not necessarily linear.

$$
\text{SP} = a - b\text{D}
$$

Where $\text{D}$ is the demand (units demanded) and $\text{SP}$ is the selling price.

Hence, total revenue, $\text{TR} = \text{SP} \cdot \text{D} = a\text{D} - b\text{D}^2$  where $a$ and $b$ are positive and $D < \frac{a}{b}$.

### Limitations of CPV Analysis

CPV analysis has a short-term decision-making model with no recognition of the time value of money.

It:

- Assumes clear separation of fixed and variable costs
- Assumes constant unit (variable) cost and revenue - not true in reality

Long-term analysis should consider the entire life-cycle of the product (activity-based costing). In the future the selling price may include externalities such as the cost of battery recycling for EVs, carbon costs for flight tickets etc.

### Break-Even Analysis

Used to evaluate the minimum amount of sales required to cover costs at a given price.

At break even, $\text{TR} = \text{TC}. Hence:

$$
\text{SP} \cdot x = \text{VC}(x) + \text{FC}
$$

Where $x$ is the number of units.

This assumes that any quantity can be sold at a given price and that the total cost curve is a straight line.

Significance:

- If production/sales (assuming they are equal) is less than the break-even cost, a loss will occur
- Lower break-even quantities are generally desireable. This can be done by:
  - Reducing the fixed costs
  - Reducing variable costs
  - Increasing the revenue rate (essentially the selling price)

### Average Cost and Economies of Scale

Average Cost (AC): total cost over units produced. This is the basis for *normal pricing*.

As production volume increases, average costs decreases - fixed costs spread over a larger number of units.

### Marginal Costs

Marginal Cost (MC): incremental/variable cost of **producing one more unit** ($\mathrm{TC}(x + 1) - \mathrm{TC}(x)$). Hence, marginal cost varies depending on current production quantity.

Marginal cost is the basis for last minute pricing.

### Contribution Margins

Profitability when taking variable costs into account.

$$
\begin{aligned}
\text{Contribution Margin (CM)} &= \text{Total Revenue} - \text{Variable Costs}

\\ \\

\text{Contribution Margin per Unit} &= \frac{\text{Total Revenue}}{\text{Units}} - \frac{\text{Variable Costs}}{\text{Units}} \\
                                     &=                      \text{Selling Price} - \frac{\text{Variable Costs}}{\text{Units}}

\\ \\

\text{Contribution Margin Ratio (CMR)} &= \frac{\text{Contribution Margin per Unit}}{\text{Selling Price}}
\end{aligned}
$$

#### Example: Break-Even Analysis with Contribution Margins

- Variable costs: \$100/unit
- Fixed costs: \$10,000/month
- Production rate: 500 units/month
- Selling price: \$200/unit

##### Without Contribution Margins

$$
\begin{aligned}
\text{TC}(x) &= x \cdot \text{SP} \\
10,\!000 + 100x &= 200x \\
10,\!000        &= 100x \\
x &= 100
\end{aligned}
$$

##### With Contribution Margins

$$
\begin{aligned}
\text{CM}(x) &= x\cdot \text{SP} - x \cdot \text{VC} \\
             &= x(\text{SP} - \text{VC}) \\
             &= x(200 - 100) \\ \\

\therefore \text{CM per Unit} &= 100 \\ \\

\therefore \text{CMR} &= 100/\text{SP} \\
                      &= 0.5 \\
\end{aligned}
$$

Now for break-even units:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\text{TR} &= \text{TC} \\
\text{SP} \cdot x &= \text{FC} + \text{VC} \cdot x \\
\therefore x &= \frac{\text{FC}}{\text{SP} - \text{VC}} \\
  &= \frac{\text{FC}}{\text{CM per Unit}} \\
  &= \frac{10,\!000}{100} \\
  &= 100
\end{aligned}
$$

Break-even revenue ($\text{BE}_{\$}$):

$$
\begin{aligned}
\text{TR} &= \text{TC} \\
  &= \text{TC} \cdot \text{SP} \\
  &= \frac{\text{FC}}{\text{CM per Unit}} \cdot \text{SP} \\
  &= \frac{\text{FC}}{\left(\frac{\text{CM per Unit}}{{\text{SP}}}\right)} \\
  &= \frac{\text{FC}}{\text{CMR}} \\
  &= \frac{10,\!000}{0.5} \\
  &= 20,\!000
\end{aligned}
$$

### Aside: Service Costing

Calculate costs of:

- Direct materials
- Direct labour
- Overhead

$$
\text{price of service} = \text{materials cost} + \text{hourly charge-out rate}
$$

Hourly charge-out rate includes labour, overhead (including procurement cost for materials) and margins.

Example: nominal 40 hours a week for 2080 hours per year (52 weeks a year) minus:

- Days not worked: sick leave, state holidays, holidays
- Time not worked: lunch, breaks, clean up/maintenance

So potential chargeable time is ~70% of the time, minus management, meetings, marketing etc that is not directly chargeable to the client.

Then there are costs for rent, power, stationary, depreciation, vehicle expenses, phones/internet, insurance, accountants, legal, advertising, cleaning etc.

So chargeable rate per hour could be something like direct labour (salary) plus annual expenses divided by ~25 hours/week * 48 week. Hence, chargeable rate can easily be more than double the hourly cost of labour.
