# 04. Web Communications and Vulnerabilities

## News of the week

https://www.socialmediatoday.com/news/twitter-reports-new-security-flaw-which-has-led-to-the-exposure-of-54-mill/629037/

Feature: connecting to people whose email and phone number you know.

Allowed association of anonymous accounts with emails and phone numbers.

Privacy bug: Twitter Android client could TODO

Introduced June 2021, disclosed after 6 months by security researcher, announced August 2022.

## Web Communication

> Encryption works. Properly implemented strong crypto systems are one of the few things that you can rely on.
> Unfortunately, endpoint security is so terrifically weak that NSA can frequently find ways around it.
>
> Edward Snowden

Encryption works. The problem is everything else.

OSI model protocols:

- Application: HTTP, FTP
- Presentation: SSL
- Session: SSH, NFS
- Transport: TCP, UDP
- Network: IP, NAT
- Data link: ARP, PPP (Point to Point Protocol)
- Physical: IEEE 802.3 (Ethernet), USB, 802.11 (Wi-Fi)

## TODO

URL:

```
   Unqualified hostname
          |--|
  https://foo.bar.example.com:443/some/path/to/a/file?query=cat
  |___|       |   |_________|
 Scheme       | Second-level domain
              |_____________|
                 Subdomain
```


## OWASP Top 10

Open Web Application SEcurity Project


A07:2021 – Identification and Authentication Failures


- Automated attacks: credential stuffing, brute force
- Weak/default passwords
- Insecure password storage
- No/ineffective MFA
- Session identifier exposed in URL
- Reuse of session identifier
- Session IDs not validated

## Insecure Design

Security flaws caused by:

- Inappropriate or reckless **design decisions** that lead to potential risk
  - Lack of knowledge, time pressure, wrong definition of deployment constraints
- Careless exposition or transfer of sensitive data
  - e.g. passwords, phone numbers being sent in logs

Secure design lifecycle as a drier:

- Careful and continuous threat modelling
- Active monitoring of vulnerabilities in third-party dependencies
- Apply least-privilege principles TODO TODO

