# 07. Access Control and Policies

Restricting access to the system.

Christchurch hot pools: stored proof of residence (driver's license, passports) in system;
had vulnerable plugin which allowed [hacker](https://www.stuff.co.nz/national/crime/129814013/computer-hacker-steals-sensitive-information-from-20000-christchurch-hot-pools-customers)
to access this data. NZ privacy laws: data was not needed after initial verification,
so they should have destroyed the data instead of storing it.

## Early Memory Access Model

Processes are isolated from each other:

- Supervisor: the sole program allowed to access the registers and load the program from it
- Descriptor register: memory addresses that each program can use
- Memory descriptor: address and size of memory allocations
- If one process is given access to another's memory (for data sharing), they will have to be next to each other

Relies on a privileged bit to control access to the descriptor register. It must
be stored in read-only memory.

Limitations:

- All or nothing: no way of sharing memory between processes
  - Printers etc. require low-level access to I/O
- Sub-routines make the system complex with contiguous memory access
  - Cannot restrict the access to sub-routines in a fine-grained way
- Addresses of processes are linked to the hardware

## Multics

- Need for access permissions (e.g. read/write/execute)
- Flexibility between hardware addresses and process memory
- Ability to dynamically link sub-routines

Each process has an array of *segment descriptors*:

- Pointer to physical start address
- Segment length
- Access control bits
  - R/Read, W/write, X/execute
  - M: supervisor-only flag

This allowed the creation of an access control matrix:

- Subjects: users, groups
- Objects: files, programs, external services etc.
- Row: *capability list* (C-list): all *objects* the *subject* can access
- Column: *access control list* (ACL): the *subjects* that can access the given *object*
- Cells: the permission level (e.g. RWX)
- An instance of the matrix creates the *access control policy*

### Exercise: Assignment 2

- List all subjects in rows:
  - User, superuser, not logged in
    - Project member (i.e. user groups)?
- List all objects in columns:
  - What are objects? Whole pages? Concepts (e.g. user profiles)? Features?
  - Own profile, other public profile info, other private profile info
  - Project
  - Billing

## Unix - Discretionary Access Control

Everything is a file.

```
Is directory
|
v | user | group | other |
d | rwx  |  rwx  |   rwx |
      ^       ^        ^
      |       |        |
setuid (s) setgid (s) t-bit (t)
Special bits replace the execute bit
```

- A file belongs to an owner, who can define the permissions for all other users
- The group is inherited from a parent directory by default
- Permissions are strictly checked in order: user, group, then other
  - If the owner has no read access (but others do), the owner cannot read

### Mandatory Access Control

Security policies are not under the user (or even admin's) control.

This was:

- Created under the multi-level security initiative of the US government
- Defined security clearance levels for subjects/objects
  - Top secret, secret, confidential, controlled unclassified, unclassified

Influenced other access control mechanisms:

- Digital right Management (DRM): prevents sharing of network-accessible resources
- Trusted Platform Module (TPM): monitors and locks the boot process with hashes
  - e.g. Secure Enclave on iOS, Titan-M on Pixel, SELinux on Android
  - Can be used to lock customers to some hardware or from installing different OSes

Rings of protection:

- Ring 0 (inner-most ring) = hardware
  - Backed by hardware
- Access to other rings can only happen when:
  - $P_1$ gives access to $P_2$ process through its $P_1$'s program segment
  - and only in pre-authorized entry points (e.g. phone permissions)

## Windows

Access control appeared in Windows NT (NB: UC's domain is `UOCNT`):

- Specify groups and users, inspired by UNIX
- New permission attributes:
  - Change ownership
  - Change permissions
  - Delete
- Attributes are not binary (e.g. `AccessDenied`, `AccessAllowed`, `SystemAudit`)
- Containers of objects (since Windows 8) with inheritance of permissions
- Allows more flexibility in installing printer drivers

Can create *domains* of users:

- Trust between domains can be uni or bidirectional
- Permissions are managed in the registry
- Users are remotely managed by Active Directory
- User profiles and TLS certificates can override permissions

Lots of users, lots of permissions, lots of programs: a nightmare for admins, and incorrect permissions being assigned (and possibly even just giving admin access to everyone).

Take two:

Attack surface hardened with a *closed kernel*, TPM added, and most drivers were removed from the kernel:

- User account control: all apps run under standard user rights
- Additional permissions explicitly asked (i.e. elevated privilege pop-up at run-time)

Cleaner abstractions with **principals** and **objects**:

- Security principals are groups, users, processes etc. with access rights
- Each principal has a security identifier
- **Objects** can be files, resources (e.g. printers), registry keys
-**Dynamic access control** with contexts added to Active Directory (e.g. work vs. home)

## Web Browsers

Reign of cookies:

- Web servers are usually stateless

Security measures:

- Secured transmission (HTTPS/TCP)
- Anti-cross site request forgery: a token generated by the web server, often in a hidden input field
  - Prevents a user accessing attacker-controlled website from making a request to a victim site

Cross-origin:

- Some libraries/style sheets passed at request time
- https://threatpost.com/amazon-alexa-one-click-attack-can-divulge-personal-data/158297/

## Hardware-level Protection Mechanisms
