# 01. Introduction

## Mobility

Mobile-first software design:

- What does this mean?
- What makes mobile software different from desktop software?
  - Inherently personal
  - Ubiquitous: always with us
  - Situated:
    - Location-aware
    - Understands local context through sensors
      - Orientation, cameras, Bluetooth etc.
  - Connected
    - Wi-Fi, cellular, Bluetooth
  - Finite
    - Limitations: limited memory, CPU, battery etc.

Mobile is a platform:

> A "platform" is a system that can be programmed and therefore customized by
> outside developers---users---and in that way, adapted to countless needs
> and niches that the platform's original developers could not have possibly
> contemplated, much less had time to accommodate.
> 
> Marc Andreeson

Cultural trends:

- Apps are casual
  - Apps must assume short, interruptible and unplanned sessions
- Apps are paranoid
  - Build to be robust: assume network signal can go out, battery can die, app
    can be killed at any moment
- Apps are personal
  - Phones are an extension of our brain: we offload our memory, computing
    (e.g. maps) onto the phone
- Apps are social

Android vs iOS:

- Apps: commercially, mostly need to have support for both iOS and Android.
- For the course, Android is chosen because as the development tools are open
source, allowing both Windows and macOS devices to be used for Android
development.

## The course

First term (6 weeks) - basics of Android required to build any app.

Second term: location, camera, sensors etc.

Assignment 1: 30%, due 5pm 24 August. Individual assignment.

Assignment 2: 30%, due 5pm 19 October. Group assignment (3 people).

Final exam: 40%.

Not covering cross-platform languages/frameworks: will always lag behind what
the native implementations can offer.

## Introduction to Android

Android is a software stack for mobile devices, including:

- An operating system
- Middleware
- Key applications

Linux is used to provide core system services:

- Security
- Memory management
- Process management
- Power management
- Hardware drivers

Android versioning:

- ~30 versions over 12 years
- Now about one major release per year
- Android version number != API level

### Android Project Structure

`manifests/AndroidManifest.xml`:

- XML file
- Acts like a table of contents
- Register main activity - starting point for the app
- Declares target, min SDK
- Declares all components of the app: activities, services
- Request permissions

Source code:

- In `/java` directory, even for Kotlin projects (`/src` in the file system)
- `androidTest`: for unit tests using the Android emulator
- `test` for Android-independent tests

Resource file:

- `/res` directory
  - `drawable`: images
  - `layout`: XML description of view layouts
  - `menu`: XML menu specifications
  - `values`: strings, dimensions, colors, lists of data
  - `raw`: other files (e.g. audio, video)
  - `xml`: other general-purpose XML files

Gradle:

- Build tool
- Need to configure to pull in external libraries (e.g. Jetpack packages) into the binary

Android Runtime (ART, formerly Dalvik VM):

- Subset of Java developed by Google, optimized for mobile
  - Does ahead-of-time compilation (AOT)
- Runs `.dex` bytecode files compiled from `.class` files
- Creates compiled extended and linkable format (ELF) executables
- Does not support some Java libraries (e.g. AWT, Swing)

Boxing:

- Each app run in its own Linux process
  - Can create additional threads for long-running operations
- Each app assigned a unique Linux ID
  - App can only access its own files

Packaging:

- Java code compiled by `javac` into bytecode, Kotlin code by `kotlinc`
- Those class files, plus those from external libraries, are compiled into `.dex` files by `dx
- Android Manifest file, resources, and the `dex` bytecode packaged into a `.apk` file by `aapt`

Android Debug Bridge (`adb`):

- CLI tool to interact with emulator or Android device
