# 07. Async Tasks and Coroutines

## Asynchronous Tasks in Android

The Main/UI thread dispatches events to UI element (widgets).
Hence, code running on that threat should always be non-blocking:
if it is blocked for more than 5 seconds, it will result in the
'application not responding' dialog.

The Android UI toolkit is not thread-safe; that is, it should never be accessed
from outside the UI thread.

In Kotlin, `Thread` and `Runnable` can be used to create worker threads.
`AsyncTask` simplifies the creation of workers that interact with the UI.

### `AsyncTask`

Usage:

- Create a worker by subclassing `AsyncTask`
- Implement the `doInBackground()` callback function
- Implement `onPostExecute()`, which delivers the result to the UI
  (runs on the UI thread)
- Run the task by calling `execute()` from the UI thread

You can optionally implement the `onProgressUpdate` method to provide progress
updates (e.g. progress bars) in the UI.

### Kotlin coroutines

Starting with version 1.3, the Kotlin language provides coroutines which
will replace `AsyncTask` in future Android versions.

Coroutines manage long-running tasks and can safely call network or disk operations.

Coroutines are lighter than threads (use less memory).

Dispatchers:

- `Dispatchers.Main`:
  - Runs on the Main/UI thread
  - Use for:
    - Calling suspend functions
    - Calling UI functions
    - Updating LiveData
- `Dispatchers.IO`:
  - Thread for performing disk or network I/O outside the main thread:
  - Use for:
    - Database access
    - Reading/writing files
    - Networks
- `Dispatchers.Default`:
  - For CPU-incentive work outside of the main thread (e.g. parsing JSON)

`suspend` functions:

- Functions that do long-running computations without blocking
- Can only be called from other `suspend` functions
  - Other `suspend` functions can be called like normal methods: synchronously
- Runs on `Dispatchers.Main` by default
- `withContext(Dispatcher)` can be used to change the dispatcher it runs on

Calling suspend functions:

```kotlin
suspend func suspendMethodCall() -> Int {
  return withContext(Dispatchers.IO) {
    // some kind of synchronous work
    10 // Last statement is the return value
  }
}

// async
coroutineScope {
  val deferred = async { suspendMethodCall() }
  val result = deferred.await()
}

// launch
viewModelScope.launch {
  suspendMethodCall()
}
// no return value when using launch

```

Built-in coroutine scopes:

- `ViewModelScope`:
  - defined for each `ViewModel` object
  - Cancelled when the `ViewModel` is cleared
- `LifecycleScope`
  - `Lifecycle` holds lifecycle state for a component (e.g. activity, fragment)
  - Cancelled when the `Lifecycle` is destroyed
- `LiveData`

## Flows

Flows emit multiple values sequentially, compared to `suspend` functions which
can only return a single value.

Actors:

- Producer: is usually a data source or repository (e.g. database, socket).
- Consumer: usually the view
- Intermediaries: optional actors which transform the emitted values before arriving
  to the consumer (e.g. `map`, `filter`)

Flow builder notation:

```kotlin
fun counter(): Flow<Int> = flow {
  // flow builder

  for (i in 1..3) {
    delay(100); // doing useful work here
    emit(i)
  }
}

counter().collect { value -> println(value) }
```

Room + Flow + LiveData + ViewModel:

```
                                               Suspend          Room
                                           ┌─────> Remote Data Source
View -----> ViewModel -----> Repository ---|
        LiveData         Flow              └─────> Local Data Source
                                               Suspend          Room
```
