# 01. Introduction

Weighting:

- Assignment 1: 25%
- Assignment 2: 25%
- Exam: 50%
  - Open book, 24 hrs
  - Essay-style answers

4th year:

- Much more reading/writing
- Now seniors: power level now much closer to lecturer, third years look up to us

a 'Senior' engineer should have:

  - Critical thinking skills
  - Collaboration
  - Communication
  - Emotional intelligence
  - Leadership
  - Learning
  - Time management
  - Self-awareness
  - Taking the initiative
  - Interacting with clients
    - Gold-plating: (offering to) add stuff that the clients don't need or want - scope creep
    - Negotiation

What does quality mean?

- Stakeholder satisfaction?
 - Should quality change depending on who is looking at it?
 - If clients do things the software was not designed to do, does that make the software bad?
- Modularity?
  - Supposedly allows independence (see mocking)
  - Amount of independence decreases the more modular the software is - at some point the costs outweigh the benefits
- Reliability?
  - Every minute of downtime costs hundreds or thousands of dollars and can severely impacts the reputation of the service
  - 787 MAX: bug that occurred after 8 months of continuous run-time. How do you catch such a bug?
  - Ariane 5's initial flight: reused software from previous rockets but the new hardware changed assumptions
    - "If it ain't broke, don't fix it"

SENG401 is about critical thinking; careful consideration problems, and recommendations supported with justifications and evidence.

Informal debates with the class. The class split into two; each side takes extreme positions (makes it hard to defend, requires examples).

Debate: "You should **always**/never document code".

