# 02. Principles

Controversial topic debates: defending extreme viewpoints is difficult and requires research to justify the viewpoint.

Software engineering principles not black and white:

- Contradicting principles
- Dependent on context, priorities, constraints, requirements
- Software is abstract; unlike other engineering areas, there are no laws of physics; we create the rules

## Technical Debt

Design decisions made in the past under circumstances that are no longer relevant
Conscious, un-ideal decisions made in the past that must be corrected

Ward Cunningham, 1992: quick and easy approach that comes with interest - additional work that must be done in the future: the longer you wait, the more code relies on the debt - interest grows over time.

Design stamina hypothesis (Martin Fowler): in a time-functionality graph:

- Good design is linear
- Bad/no design starts of faster, but drops off over time
- Where the lines meet is the *design payoff line*

### Types of Technical Debt

Two axes: deliberate/inadvertent, and reckless/prudent

- Deliberate-reckless: don't have time to design
- Deliberate-prudent: must ship now and deal with the consequences
  - The 'best' type of technical debt
- Inadvertent-reckless: not understanding the technical debt in the project
  - The worst type: don't even know you are accruing technical debt
- Inadvertent-prudent: understanding the accrued technical debt only after writing it

### Reasons for Debt

- Time: deadlines
  - Faster time to market may lead to increased short-/long-term budget
  - Prototypes: usually end up being part of the shipping product even though they should be thrown out once they are done
- Money: budget constraints
  - Interest must be paid eventually though
- Knowledge/experience

Caused by:

- Change in business decisions
- Market changes
- Scope changes/creep
  - The scrum master should:
    - Be the interface between the development team and the rest of the world: marketing, management, etc.
    - Never be part of the development team; they should be part of the management so that they have the authority to protect the team and say 'no' to the needs/wants of others
      - In reality, it is cheaper to have them part of the team
- Resourcing changes
- Poor management
- Inexperienced team

### Measuring Technical Debt

302: a lot of debt by the end of the year.

Measure how much technical debt there is by:

- Checking how much refactoring is being done
- Measuring sprint velocity
  - **This must be done from the start**

Types of debt:

- Deliberate technical debt can easily be measured by documenting the debt how much time it would take to pay it off
- Inadvertent technical debt is more difficult to measure
- Debt from third-party libraries is inadvertent, reckless technical debt (although we can get a rough estimate of debt using metrics like the number of open issues)

Interest rates:

- If the interest rate is high, it will only be used in extreme circumstances
  - e.g. preparing for demo for VC funding
  - For critical applications (e.g. planes, banks), technical debt is extremely expensive
- Sometimes, the debt never needs to be paid off:
  - Prototypes
  - When you won't build on top of the debted code
  - Programs with short lifespans - e.g. for short advertising campaign
  - Firmware - will rarely be updated
    - But when a new version of the hardware is released, it will likely be reused

Positive/negative value, visible/invisible attributes:

- Visible, positive: feature
- Visible, negative: bug
- Invisible, positive: architecture
- Invisible, negative: technical debt

Pick a process/framework (Scrum/Kanban/Waterfall): Which part is devoted to Technical Debt correction/payment?

### Fan-in vs Fan-out

- Fan-in:
  - Number of direct dependents
  - Utility functions should have a high fan-in
  - the larger the fan in, the more stuff breaks when the module breaks
- Fan-out:
  - Number of direct dependencies
  - Initialization function will likely have a very high fan-out
  - Any dependency breaking may break the entire module

### Refactor vs Re-engineering

- Refactor: rewrite that does not change the module's external interface ('refactor' in IDEs change method names and hence signatures, so it isn't actually a refactor)
- Re-engineering: rewrite that changes the interface and hence requires dependents to be updated

Hence, **refactorings should be done as-you-go** while re-engineerings should be done infrequently and only after careful planning.

### Reuse vs KISS

Object-oriented programming built on:

- Code reuse
  - Opportunistic: create reusable modules/methods as you go
    - Internal/external: when you use external libraries, you take on their technical debt as well
  - Planned/strategic: create modules/methods in preparation for plans
- Modeling the real world

But reuse didn't work - requirements for each program and the abstractions required differ.

Reuse is **big design up front**:

- Waterfall: objects and entities must be designed
- 'Just in case' planning
- Generalized utility functions
- More planning/analyses = cost savings (*if* you get it right)
- Bugs easier to find and fix

Unfortunately, determining the 'correct' design is impossible until implementation.

Situations when reuse does work:

- Design patterns (not code)
- Libraries (module with methods that you can call)
- Frameworks (frameworks call *your* code)

Sapir-Whorf hypothesis/linguistic relativity: the structure of a language influences how you think. In programming terms: the programming paradigms we are used to influence our mindset and how we solve problems.

Reuse requires generic and abstract code/thinking:

- Abstraction: extracting commonalities between similar classes/objects to create more generic class
- Extensibility:
  - Open-closed principle
  - Minimize impacts of future changes on existing classes
  - Generic/abstract classes/packages
  - Planning for future 'maybes'
    - Sometimes may be over-engineering
    - Future needs may change

KISS:

- You Ain't Gonna Need It (YAGNI)
  - Do not implement until needed
  - Do not try and predict the future
  - Do not over-engineer
  - Leads to:
    - Reduced cognitive load
      - 7 ± 2: experts could hold much more as they would 'chunk' multiple items together
    - Fewer bugs
    - Dead code: code whose results are not used (but may cause exceptions and hence still have some use)
    - Unreachable code: branches that will never be executed
  - Is technical debt good?
- The simplest solution may be the best solution
  - Less code, fewer bugs
  - Reduced complexity
  - Possibly faster
  - Makes testing easier - fewer inputs and branches
  - Possibly faster to develop - however, finding the simple/elegant solution to a problem is often difficult
- Refactoring:
  - Keep it simple; continually refactor and extend the code as required

## Design Principles

### Encapsulation vs Information Hiding

Encapsulation is a *tool* to draw a border around a module.

Information hiding is a *principle* where you hide internal details from the outside world. This can be done *using* encapsulation.

This is used to **hide what varies**; anything that could be changed should be hidden (e.g. algorithm used for sorting).

Hence, argument and return types should be as high/generic as possible (eg. return `Collection` instead of `ArrayList`).

If a property or method is private, the type doesn't matter as the type is encapsulated anyway.

### Visibility, Access Levels, Modifiers

'Never use public properties; use getters and setters instead'.

Getters and setters; two extreme viewpoints:

- Getters should *never* be used:
  - Tell, don't ask: the class should have methods that modify the properties; other classes should never modify the property directly
  -   e.g. `Bread` class should have a `toast` method instead of a `Toaster` class toasting the bread, with the Bread class and its sub-classes implementing a `Toastable` interface
- Getters should *always* be used:
  - Everything done inside the class should also always go through the getters/setters
    - This allows the property type to be changed without affecting the rest of the class: a secondary level of encapsulation
  - NB: if you simply return an object, the object could be modified and hence, removing the point of the getter
    - Hence, either return a copy or wrap it around an unmodifiable element (e.g. `List.unmodifiableList` in Java).

### Coupling & Cohesion

Coupling: the extend to which two modules depend on each other.

Cohesion: how well the methods and properties within a module belong with each other.

Aim for high cohesion, low coupling.

Principle: **keep data and behavior together** (i.e. high cohesion).

The **principle of separation** of concerns separates data and behavior, but puts the related behaviors together.

### The SOLID Principles

#### Single Responsibility Principle (SRP)

Each thing should only be in charge of one thing.

A responsibility = a reason for the module to change.

The SRP conflicts with the modeling of the real world, where objects usually do more than two things:

  - e.g. a modem does multiple things: it dials/hangups, and sends/receives data
  - Having both of these roles within a single interface violates the SRP

In addition, applying the SRP mindlessly can lead to:

- Increased coupling and needless complexity
  - Getting all the data you need may require it to pass through multiple middlemen if the data is spread too thin
    - But at the same time, having all the data together can lead to a god class
- Difficulty in on-boarding new team members or understanding how to architect the program
- Code fragmentation and broken/leaky encapsulation

Figuring out what the Single Responsibility should be can often be difficult?

[Robert Martin's thoughts on SRP](https://blog.cleancoder.com/uncle-bob/2014/05/08/SingleReponsibilityPrinciple.html):

> ...This principle is about people.
>
> When you write a software module, you want to make sure that when changes are requested, those changes can only originate from a single person, or rather, a single tightly coupled group of people representing a single narrowly defined business function.
>
> Imagine you took your car to a mechanic in order to fix a broken electric window. He calls you the next day saying it’s all fixed. When you pick up your car, you find the window works fine; but the car won’t start. It’s not likely you will return to that mechanic because he’s clearly an idiot.


#### Open/Closed Principle (OCP)

Modules should be open for extension, but closed for modification.

That is, you should be able to extend the behavior of an existing program without modifying it.

Interfaces are useful because they are an agreement that you will follow some defined behavior (for all public methods/properties); that is, **Design-by-contract**:

- Pre-conditions: entry conditions that the client must ensure are met
- Post-conditions: obligations by the service that must be true when the service method exits
- Invariants: properties that are guaranteed to be maintained
- All children must abide by their parent's contract: they can *loosen pre-conditions* and *tighten post-conditions*, but not vice-versa
    - e.g. Java Collection interface's `add` method returns a boolean: whether or not the collection has been modified as a result of the operation

The open/closed principle forces abstractions and loose coupling and often requires dependency inversion.

Libraries and plug-in architectures are often good examples of OCP.

Can a program be fully closed? Probably not as this requires big design up-front.

[**Protected Variation**](https://martinfowler.com/ieeeSoftware/protectedVariation.pdf): anything that is likely to change should be hidden and pushed downwards, with stable interfaces above/around them.

#### [Liskov-Substitution Principle (LSP)](http://wiki.c2.com/?LiskovSubstitutionPrinciple)

You should be able to change the subclass of an object without changing the behavior of the program i.e. design-by-contract: children adhere to their parent's contract.

The LSP is not easy to implement and has no immediate benefits; rather, it gives long-term trust in modules.

#### Interface Segregation Principle (ISP)

Clients should not be forced to depend on interfaces/methods they will not use:

- Many specific interfaces over one generic one
- Avoids interface pollution
- Classes should not be forced to implement irrelevant methods

[Martin Fowler's original article](https://web.archive.org/web/20110714224545/http:/www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/isp.pdf).

#### Dependency Inversion Principle (DIP)

High-level modules should not depend on low-level modules: both should depend on abstractions/interfaces.

From this, the following follows:

- Abstractions should never depend on details
- Code should depend on things that are at the same or higher level of abstraction
- High-level policy should not depend on low-level details
  - Low-level details can change
- Low-level dependencies should be captured in low-level abstractions

Mostly taken for granted by the newer generation of programmers learning OO languages.

### Common Closure Principle (CCP)

SRP at the package level: classes in a package should be closed together against the same kind of changes.

- Highly-coupled classes should be grouped together in a package
  - With the end result of increasing cohesion at the class level
- What affects one affects all

### Common Reuse Principle (CRP)

Classes in a package are reused together: if you reuse one class, reuse all of them.

Classes being reused within the same context should be part of the same package.

e.g. Util package in Java.

### Abstract Factory (AKA Kit pattern)

Dependency inversion: client no longer needs to care about the specifics of the implementations.

Factories define an interface to instantiate new instances of a specific implementation of a class/interface, removing the need for a client to know the exact type being instantiated.

Hence, this is an example of dependency inversion as the client uses an interface to distance itself from the specific class and constructor being called.

An abstract factory takes this further by giving the factory interface methods to instantiate multiple related (and possibly dependent) objects.

## Class Debates

### Always/Never Write Documentation

Always:

- On-boarding/knowledge transfer
- Justifying design decisions
- Large codebases, makes navigability easier (usability)

Never:

- Documentation always lags behind; old documentation can be counter-productive
- Reading the code can be more useful than reading documentation
- Documentation can be an excuse for bad/complex code

Always, counterpoints:

- Complexity of code matches complexity of the problem space: code describes how, not why
  - Documentation: high-level overview
- Technical debt: code will not be perfect; need documentation to explain what needs to be changed
- Documentation should be written before the code (like TDD) - in this case, documentation will always be updated (like TDD)
- On-boarding new technologies

Never, counterpoints:

- Bob Martin: "*A comment is a failure to express yourself in code. If you fail, then write a comment; but try not to fail*"
- Documentation not being updated still remains an additional risk
- There should always be an obvious solution
- Code too complicated to be understandable: can always be simplified to a point where the code is self-explanatory
- Grady Booch: "*Clean code is simple and direct. Clean code reads like well-written prose. Clean code never obscures the designer’s intent but rather is full of crisp abstractions and straightforward lines of control.*"

### Collective vs Individual Code Ownership

Collective:

- High bus factor: person exiting the company will not
- Allows a cross-functional team
- Reduces knowledge siloing
- Improves review process: more people familiar with the code base
- Reduces level of pre-planning required
- Stops the blame game; share the blame and reward; the process, not the individual, had issues.
- When person leaves the project, who remains responsible for the code?
- Less communication overhead - do not need to talk to specific person in order to make improvements/bug fixes
- http://www.extremeprogramming.org/rules/collective.html

Individual:

- Does not mean siloing; means accountability
  - Ensures there is always an expert for any part of the code base
- Allows specialization; more efficient distribution of labor
- Code reviews: fresh set of eyes better for finding issues, bugs
- Higher standard of quality when your name is attached to your code

Individual, counterpoints:

- Code ownership required in small company; there needed to be a domain expert??
- Collective ownership means completely anonymous code and no accountability
- Allows more even split over workload
- Reduces risk of merge conflicts as there should only be one person working in each area
- Too many cooks
- Code creator will always have better understanding of the code - know who to talk to

Collective, counterpoints:

- Code reviews a form of collective ownership
- Responsibility and ownership are different: you are still responsible for quality, tests, etc. of the code you wrote
- Individual ownership often becomes 'your code is broken, fix it'
- If owner on vacation, you get stuck
- If your own code and no one else can work on it, why bother documenting?
- Merge requests: even if there is individual ownership there are still changes that require multiple modules to be updated in tandem

### #noestimate

