# 04. When Good Design Goes Bad (Part 1)

UML requires big design up-front, synchronization of diagrams and code. However, it is useful for communication.

What we've learned:

- 201: Design is important and achievable
- 301: Quality is important and achievable
- 302:
  - Many things are important:
    - Business decisions
    - Time/cost/resources
    - Processes
    - The team is important
    - The individual is important
    - The customer is important
    - Priorities
    - Everything
  - And are achievable, but not by us
- 401:
  - What is design?
  - What is quality?
  - What is process?
  - TODO

## Design Erosion

AKA: architectural drift, software aging, architecture erosion, software decay, software rot, software entropy.

When the initial design becomes more and more obsolete:

- The world changes, requiring the design to change:
  - New requirements, incremental
  - Technical debt
    - Hacks during rush jobs
  - Bug fixes/patches, local corrections
  - Changes in the business environment/strategy
    - Solving different problems that the architecture is not capable of meeting
  - Adoption of new solutions/technologies
  - People change
  - Vapourized design decisions
    - Original designers left
    - Undocumented design decisions
    - Documents not followed
  - Quick fixes
  - Inexperienced teams (new programmers and/or new teams)
  - Iterative methods/practices
  - Time/cost pressures
  - Not enough language support

Consequences:

- Accumulation of sub-optimal design solutions, leading to further design erosion
- Increased time/cost to add/modify/fix bugs or features
- Workarounds, ad-hoc approaches, trying to fix the symptom instead od the problem
  - Fixing one bug makes two more, fixing those causes a hundred more
- Negative impact on development
- Deployment problems
- A large and growing number of bugs/issues
- Spiraling descent towards worsening design

Eventually, a replacement, rewrite, re-engineering or refactor becomes required.

So what to do when changes occur?

1. Optimal design strategy
  - No-compromise in design
  - High local/immediate costs
2. Minimal effort strategy
  - 'Stretching' design rules slightly
  - Could help with cost/time constraints
  - TODO

## Class Discussion: How Do Classical and Modern Processes Influence Design Erosion

## 'Natural' Rot

> ... the design of a software project is documented primarily by its source code
> 
> Robert C. Martin

To destroy an abandoned building, cut a hole in the roof and wait for it to rot from the inside out.

Software works the same way; without proper maintenance, a small hole can lead it to decaying from the inside.

Broken window theory: hacks in software normalize other hacks, leading to a spiraling descent in quality.

Symptoms:

- Rigidity
- Fragility
- Immobility
- Viscosity
- Needless repetition
- Opacity
- Needless complexity
