# 09. Recap

Not asessed.

Accreditation of Qualifications:

- Washington Accord (WA): Professional Engineers
- Sydney Accord (SA): Engineering Technologists
  - Not engineers, but may be delegated authority by professional engineers
  - Requires a degree
- Dublin Accord (DA): Engineering Technicians
  - Requires a certification

WA graduate attributes:

- Assessable outcomes
- Gives confidence that the educational TODO
- The same for each discipline


Lifelong learning:
- critically analyzing what you are doing
- learning about concepts, not specific tools


SENG401:

- Question: be skeptical
- 'It depends'
- Arguing/debating
  - With justification and examples
  - Arguing for the other side to what you blieve
- Code ownership
- Estimation
  - Should we?
  - If not, what do we replace it with? Does it erquire replacement?
- Technical debt
  - Broken window, hole in the roof
  - Interest, paying it off, when?
= Visiblity accses
Design by contract
Design erioson
Code smell, metric
Solving problems, rseerach, balanced viewpoints, communication todo

Standards
- Why do we have them?
- Pros/cons
What can we learn from then?
Thinking about society-wide level
Verification & balidation
CMM/I
  Putting oursxelves in the customer's shoes?
  Organiation-wide standards
  What does 'maturity' mean?
  When might we want to be appraised
  Software: never finished; Other disciplines 

Quality
  What
  Why do we care?
  Difference in context = diffrence in strategy
  Testing strategy
  Tseting techniques
  Not just automated testing
Audit
  Observing a real team
  Data, analysis, interpretation
  Procsses, code metrics
  Objective/subjective analyses: hard/soft
  V&V
  Live review: beside manner
  todo

  What was the purpose of the audit?
    Different, unknown technology used by the 2022 projects
    Seeing them make the same mistake we did: reflection
    Team issues
    Team cohesion: sub-groups or working alone
      Step 1: awareness of issues
    Ignoring the root issue
    Importance of setting and following rules
    How different personality types interact with each other
    Differing expectations/goals between team members
    Recency effect: looking back on start of SENG302


  What was the purpose of assignment 2:
    
## Exam

- Take-home exam
- PDF
  - Learn: auto-save didn't work in one exam
  - Submit PDF on Learn dropbox
- Can look up anything; cannot communicate with others
- 4 essay-style questions
  - Incomplete scenario: must make and state assumptions
  - 'I would ask this question of these people: if this response do that'
  - Try keep the answers succinct - essays, not a thesis
  - Anssers may have headings
  - Balanced answers: do not take a strong stance
  - Diagnosis, recommendations, justifications, examples
  - Put the recommendations within the context of the scenario
  - Cite articles
- 24 hours available
  - Gives you time to think
  - Reduces time pressure and anxiety
  - Sleep!
  - Parkinson's law: the work grows to fill up the time
- DM Moffat on SENG401 Slack if required; class updates on exam channel
- Before the exam, feel free to chat with Moffat; alone or groups
  - After the exam, cannot talk until results are released



Quality without name? Objective or subjective uality?


Christopher Alexander: young professionals: acceptance of standards that are too low.


