# 14. Tracking

## Fiducial Markers

A fiducial marker is any planar object introduced into the scene and in the field-of-view of a n imaging system to be used as a point of reference of measure.

Can be used for:

- Object position estimation
- Camera position estimation
- Estimate transform/poses of robots

How:

- Calibrate camera to determine and correct distortion
- Homography: 3x3 matrix mapping between projection of two planes
  - If $x_1$ and $x_2$ are corresponding points on two planes, $x_1 = H \cdot x_2$
- Pose: 6 degrees of freedom; rotation + translation along each axis; can be represented in 3x3 rotation and 1x3 translation matrix. Called the *extrinsics* matrix
- Process:
  - Find marker outline
    - e.g. ArUco: adaptive thresholding, contour extraction, quad extraction
    - e.g. AprilTags: edge detection, line segment detection, quad extraction
  - Calculate homography using corner locations
  - Calculate extrinsics using focal length and marker size

Challenges:

- Occlusion
- Unfocused or motion blur
- Dark/uneven light, vignetting
- Jitter: exact position can vary between frames
- False positives: not all squares are markers

## Markerless Tracking

Use 'natural' features for tracking: corners, edges, points etc.

Also: templates - basically something whose representation stored in the system.

This is more difficult and usually much more computationally expensive.

Texture tracking:

- Replace marker corners with keypoints
  - SIFT, SURF, GLOH, etc.
  - Apply detector to every single pixel
  - Find the best set of keypoints (e.g. filter by strength/similarity/distance)
  - Create descriptors; windows around the keypoints
- Generate robust descriptors that allow differentiation between keypoints
  - SIFT:
    - Estimate dominant keypoint orientation using gradients
    - Compensate for detected orientation
      - e.g. if keypoints on plane, transform all features as if the camera is normal to the plane
    - Describe keypoints in terms of surrounding gradient radially
- Match descriptors against database (created offline)
  - Build a database with all descriptors and their position on the original image
    - For robustness, search for corners at multiple scales
  - May require data structures to allow for efficient searching
- Outlier removal:
  - Start with the cheapest techniques first (e.g. geometric)
  - End with homography-based tests

Hybrid tracking: use gyroscope for prediction of camera orientation, and computer vision to correct gyroscope drift. Kalman filter?

Outdoor: lots of landmarks and planar features, but varying lighting conditions make it difficult.
