# 1. DFAs and NFAs

## Introduction

### Definitions

- Alphabet, $\Sigma$: set of symbols. $\Sigma \neq \emptyset$
- String: sequence of symbols. $\epsilon$ = empty string
- $\Sigma^*$: set of all strings
- Language $L$: subset of $\Sigma^*$

### Concatenation

#### Strings

$xy$ is y concatenated to $x$, where $x$ and $y$ are either strings or characters.

Concatenation of strings is associative: brackets are not needed.

#### Languages

$$
AB = \{ xy \mid x\in A \textrm{ and } y\in B \}
$$

i.e. `A.map(a => B.map(b => a+b))`

Language concatenation is associative.

$\{ \epsilon \}$ is the identity language: $\{ \epsilon \}A = A\{ \epsilon \} = A$.

#### Powers: Strings/Characters

$a^n$ is the string/character concatenated $n$ times

Base case: $a^0 = \epsilon \therefore a^{n+1} = a^n a$.

#### Powers: Languages

$$
\begin{aligned}
A^0 &= \{ \epsilon \} \\
A^1 &= A \\
A^* &= \bigcup_{n\in N}{A^n} = A^n = A^0 \cup A^1 \cup A^2 \cup A^3 \cup \dots \\
A^+ &= A^1 \cup A^2 \cup A^3 \cup \dots
\end{aligned}
$$

Thus, $A^*$ will always contain the empty string, while $A^+$ will only contain it if it is a member of $A$.

##### Properties

$$
A^* A^* = A^{**} = A^* \\
\emptyset A = \emptyset = A\emptyset
$$

## Deterministic Finite Automata

$$
M = (Q, \Sigma, \delta, q_0, F)
$$

Where:

- $Q$ is a non-finite, empty set (vertices) of states
- $q_0$ is the start state (arrow from nowhere)
- $F \subseteq Q$ is the set of end states (double circle)
- $\Sigma$ is the input alphabet - a non-finite, empty set. Each symbol represents a transition. Every transition can occur at any state, even if it just loops back
- $\delta$ is the transition function: $Q \times \Sigma \rightarrow Q$ - a function taking the state and transition as inputs, and outputting an end state

$M$ reading the input string $w\in Z^*$ symbol by symbol. For each symbol, the transition function is run using with the current symbol and state. The input string is *accepted* if $M$ ends in an **end state**.

## Extended Transition Function

$\hat{\delta}$ extends $\delta$ to take in strings (and not just symbols) as the transition by processing each symbol in the string and passing the remaining substring recursively.

$$
\hat{\delta}: Q\times \Sigma^* \rightarrow Q \\
\hat{\delta}(q, \epsilon) = q \\
\hat{\delta}(q, ax) = \hat{\delta}(\delta (q,a), x) \textrm{ where } a \in \Sigma, x \in \Sigma^* \textrm{ and the input string is } ax
$$

- The string $w$ is accepted by $M$ if $\hat{\delta}(q_0, w) \in F$
- **The language accepted by $M$**, $L(M) = \{ w\in Z^* \mid \hat{\delta}(q_0,w)\in F \}$
- The language $A \in \Sigma^*$ is **regular** if $A = L(M)$ for some DFA $M$

All finite languages are regular (e.g. OR every single string) but not all infinite languages are regular.

Regular languages are closed over:

- Complement (inverse)
- Intersection
- Union
- Concatenation
- Star

### Proving Regular Languages Are Closed under the Complement Operator

Let $A\subseteq \Sigma^*$ be regular. Show $A$ ̅is regular.

By their definitions, $A = L(M)$ for some DFA $M = (Q, \Sigma, \delta , q_0, F)$.

Swap accepting and non-accepting states:

Let $M^′ = (Q, \Sigma, \delta , q_0, Q − F)$. Now, show that $L(M^′) = \bar{A}$.

To do this, we first show that $M′$ is regular. This means that $L(M) = \{ w \in Z^* \mid \hat{\delta}(q_0, w) \in F \}$.

The first requirement, $w\in Z^*$ is obviously fulfilled. The second bit will be:

$$
$\hat{\delta}(q_0,w)\in Q−F$
$$

$Q−F$ is the complement of $F$, so: $\hat{\delta}(q_0, w) \notin F$

The definition of the extended transition function is $\hat{\delta}(q_0, w)\in F$, which is the complement of above. Thus, this means it satisfies the opposite of $L(M)$:

$$
w\notin L(M) \\
w\in \overline{L(M)} ̅\\
w\in A
$$

### Intersection of Two Automata

Let $A, B \subseteq \Sigma^*$ be regular. Show that $A \cap B$ will be regular.

$A = L(M_1)$ for DFA $M_1 = (Q_1, \Sigma, \delta _1, q_1, F_1)$.

$B = L(M_1)$ for DFA $M_2 = (Q_2, \Sigma, \delta _2,q_2,F_2 )$

Only the alphabet is the same between the automata

Idea: keep track of the state $M_1$ is in and the state $M_2$ is in at the same time. Define the state as a pair of two states.

$$
\textrm{Let} M = (Q_1 \times Q_2, \Sigma, \delta, (q_1,q_2), F_1 \times F_2)
$$

Now, we need to define the transition function where $a \in \Sigma$ is the transition symbol, $w \in \Sigma^*$ is the transition string, $p_1 \in Q_1$ and $p_2 \in Q_2$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\delta((p_1,p_2), a) &= (\delta _1(p_1, a), \delta _2(p_2, a)) \\
\hat{\delta}((p_1, p_2), w) &= (\widehat{\delta_1}(p_1, w), \widehat{\delta_2}(p_2, w))
\end{aligned}
$$

Need to show $L(M) = L(M_1) \cap L(M_2)$. For any string $w \in \Sigma^*$ where $w \in L(M)$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\hat{\delta}((q_1, q_2), w) &\in F_1 \times F_2 \\
(\widehat{\delta_1}(q_1, w),\widehat{\delta_2}(q_2, w)) &\in F_1 \times F_2 \\
\end{aligned}
$$

$$
\widehat{\delta_1}(q_1, w) \in F_1 \textrm{ and } \widehat{\delta_2}(q_2, w) \in F_2 \\
w\in L(M_1) \textrm{ and } w\in L(M_2) \\
w\in L(M_1) \cap L(M_2) \textrm{ as required}
$$

### Union of Two Automata

Let $A, B \subseteq \Sigma^*$ be regular. Show that $A \cup B$ will be regular.

$A \cup B \leftrightarrow \overline{\bar{A} \cap \bar{B}}$ by De Morgan's law. There is closure under the complement and intersection, so there must be closure under the union operation.

## Non-Deterministic Finite Automata

NFA: a state can have zero or multiple transitions using a single symbol.

$$
M = (Q, \Sigma, \delta , q_0, F)
$$

$\delta: Q\times \Sigma \rightarrow P(Q)$, where $P(Q)$ is the power set. That is, the transition function will return a set of states. If multiple states are returned, $M$ can move to any of those states. If the empty set is returned, $M$ will get stuck and that route should be ignored.

If any route leads to an accept state, the string should be accepted.

### Extended Transition Relation

$$
\hat{\delta}: Q\times \Sigma^* \rightarrow P(Q)
$$

$$
\begin{aligned}
\hat{\delta}(q, \epsilon) &= \{ q \} \\
\hat{\delta}(q, ax) &= \bigcup_{p\in \delta(q, a)}{\hat{\delta}(p, x)}, a\in \Sigma, x\in \Sigma^*
\end{aligned}
$$

That is, for every state it can be in, calculate the possible transition(s) for the next symbol, put them all in a set, and repeat until the input string is empty.

$w$ is accepted by $M$ if and only if $\hat{\delta}(q_0, w) \in F \neq \emptyset$.

The language accepted by $M$ is the set of all strings where the above is true:

$$
L(M) = \{ w\in \Sigma^* \mid \hat{\delta}(q_0, w)\in F \neq \emptyset \}
$$

### NFDA to DFA Conversion Through Subset Construction

States become a set containing all states it could be in given the transitions. If it can be in the states $\{ q_x, q_y, q_z \}$ then denote the state as $q_xyz$. Accept all states where the set contains any element from the accept states set.

#### Proving Every NFA is Accepted by a DFA

$$
M = (Q, \Sigma, \delta, q_0, F)
$$

Idea: keep track of all states the NFA $M$ can be in while reading the input.

Subset automaton (DFA) $M^′ = (P(Q), \Sigma, \delta^′, \{ q_0 \}, F^′)$ where $F^′ = \{ S\subseteq Q \mid S \cap F \neq \emptyset \}$ (any state where one or more elements of the state contains an element from the accept states).

$$
\delta^′: P(Q) \times \Sigma \rightarrow P(Q)
$$

$$
\begin{aligned}
\delta^′(S, a) &= \bigcup_{q \in S}{\delta (q, a)} \\
\hat{\delta}^′(S, w) &= \bigcup _{q \in S}{\hat{\delta}(q,w)}
\end{aligned}
$$

Now show that $L(M^′) = L(M)$. For any $w \in \Sigma^*$, if $w \in L(M^′)$:

The definition of $L(M^′)$: $\hat{\delta^′}(\{ q_0 \}, w) \in F^′$.

$$
\begin{aligned}
\hat{\delta^′}(\{ q_0 \}, w) \cap F &\neq \emptyset \\
\left(\bigcup_{q\{ q_0 \}}{\hat{\delta}(q, w)}\right) \cap F &\neq \emptyset \\
\hat{\delta}(q_0, w) \cap F &\neq \emptyset
\end{aligned}
$$
Hence, $w \in L(M)$.

### NDFA with $\epsilon$-Transitions

Example use case: union of two regular languages: one new start state, with two $\epsilon$ transitions to each regular language.

$$
\epsilon \notin \Sigma \\
\delta: Q \times (\Sigma \cup \{ \epsilon \}) \rightarrow P(Q)
$$

$\epsilon$-closure of $q$: $E(q) = \{ p \in Q \mid p \textrm{ is reachable from } q \textrm{ with a sequence of } \epsilon \textrm{ transitions} \}$.

The sequence can be of length zero, or be arbitrarily long.

#### Extended Transition Relation

$$
\begin{aligned}
\hat{\delta}(q, \epsilon) &= E(q) \\
\hat{\delta}(q, ax) & = \bigcup_{p\in E(q)}{\bigcup_{p\in \delta(q, a))}{\hat{\delta}(p,x)}}, a\in \Sigma, x\in \Sigma^*
\end{aligned}
$$
