# 02. Javascript Continued

## Asynchronous

### JS Event Loop

JS is a single threaded and single concurrent language and hence has a single call stack, heap, queue etc.

Call stack maintains record of function calls. Calling a function pushes onto the stack, returning pops off.

Heap: memory allocation to variables/objects.

Queue: list of messages (and their associated callback function) that need to be processed. **When the call stack is empty**, the callback function for the oldest message gets pushed onto the stack.

```javascript
setTimeout(() => console.log("1"), 0);
console.log("2");
// Outputs 2, then 1
```

On the browser, there are queues for the DOM, network requests and timers; these are part of the Javascript *Web API*, not the language itself. Node.JS these are not available or reimplemented.

### Callback Hell/The Pyramid of Doom

```javascript
async1(result => {
  async2(result => {
    async3(result => {
      async4(result => {
        async5(result => {
          async6(result => {
            ...
          });
        });
      });
    });
  });
});

```

This may occur if the API **under-fetches** data: the client needs to call one API to get enough information to call another.

Promises have tried to solve this.

### Promises

An object with three possible states:

- Pending
- Fulfilled; operation completed successfully
- Rejected; operation failed

```javascript
somePromise
.then(someResult => {
  ...
  return someResult;
})
.then(newResult => ...)
.catch(err => ...)
.finally(() => ...)

```

### Async/await

Syntactic sugar over promises introduced in ES6.

By adding the `async` modifier to the function, the function will return a promise.

```javascript
async function f() {
  return 1;
}

// Or:

let g = async () => 1;

// Before ES6:

let h = () => new Promise((resolve, reject) => resolve(1));

```

By adding the `await` modifier before a promise or expression in a function (doesn't work in global scope), it will force the function to wait for the promise to return. `try`/`catch` can be used as normal; if the promise fails, the contents of the `catch` statement will run.

```javascript
(async () => {
  const i = await f();
  const j = await g();
  const k = await h();
})();

// Before ES6:

f()
.then(i => g())
.then(j => h();
.then(k => {})
```

## Modules and Dependencies

### CommonJS

- One specification used for managing module dependencies
- Adopted by NodeJS
- The de-facto standard
- Browserify (or similar) required to use CommonJS in the front-end

Use either `module.exports.*` or `exports.*` to expose module's public interface: the public interface is whatever value is assigned to `module.exports`.

Import the module using `require()`.

### `npm`

A node-specific package manger.

Use `npm install --save module_name` to install a package and add it to the project's `package.json` file.
