# 04. HTTP Servers, REST and GraphQL

Databases, JS behavior, REST versioning

## REST

A REST service is a platform and language independent service that runs *on top of* HTTP(S).

REST services use the same HTTP verbs used by web browsers and hence, they can be thought of as a subset of web apps.

HTTP/REST resources usually have a unique identifier (e.g. integer. UUID). Often, the structure of the URL mirrors the structure of the data.

Misc:

- `PUT` is a replace operation; `PATCH` is a partial change
  - How would you represent the deletion of a property? Null value?
- REST has no security, encryption, session management or QoS guarantees
- REST, being built on top of HTTP, is stateless
  - The **entire resource** is returned
  - Underfetching/overfetching due to request-response architecture

URLs:

- Hide all implementation details
  - e.g. file extensions related to the server software (php) so that server language can change
- Be consistent with singularity/plurality of resource names
- Keep everything lowercase
- Replace spaces for hyphens
- Always provide default page/resource as a response

State timescales (shortest to longest):

- Individual HTTP request: stateless
- Business transaction: e.g. multiple `GET` requests to get information, then `POST` request
- Session state: required for web *applications*
- Preferences: state stored in DB
- Record state

Session state:

- Include session ID as query parameter in `GET` requests: easy to see and copy
- Cookies: random identifier sent with each HTTP request to the server
  - Session/persistent: deleted/stored when browser closed/session ended
  - Secure: HTTPS only
  - `HTTPOnly`: not accessible via JS
  - `Set-cookie: key=value; Expires = date`
  - Cookies identify the combination of user account/browser/device

## HTTP

Stateless protocol; each request/response self-contained.

- `GET`: retrieve named resource
- `HEAD`: `GET`, but return only headers
- `POST`: create new resource
- `PUT`: change specified resource
- `OPTIONS`: get supported methods for the given resource
- `PATCH`: modify existing resource
- `DELETE`: delete specified resource

Safe methods (nullipotentcy): methods that do not modify resources. `GET` and `HEAD` are safe.

Idempotent methods: *intended* state is the same regardless of how many times the method is called. `POST` and `PATCH` are **not** idempotent.

The lack of side effects helps in making the API more fault tolerant

### CAP Theorem

- Consistency: read will always return most recent write
- Availability: non-failing node will return reasonable response within a reasonable amount of time
- Partition tolerance: system will continue to function when it becomes fragmented

In theory, you can have two of the three. However, networks fail (which you have no control over) so you *must* tolerate partitioning.

## API Versioning

Ensure compatibility between the API provider and users. Adding new features may not require new versions, but removing or amending features will require a new version.

Versions may be useful for:

- A/B testing
- System testing; dev, test, prod
- For different subsets of clients e.g. business vs consumers, geographical/political regions
- Rollback of unacceptable APIs

From a client perspective, an API is backwards compatible if it it can continue to function through a service change (e.g. adding new features) and *forwards compatible* if the client can be changed without needing a service change.

### Semantic Versioning

`MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`:

- Major: incompatible API changes
- Minor: functionality added in backwards-compatible manner
- Patch: bug fixes

### Encoding Versioning

- Query parameter (e.g. `?version=xx.xx`)
- URL (e.g. `api/v1`)
  - Semantically messy: looks like you are selecting version of a resource
- Header
  - Hard to test

### Publishing

- Credibility: trust that the API will do what it says on the tin
- Support: support the API
- Success: sharing success stories
- Access: no SDK is the best SDK (e.g. cURL requests)
- Documentation should be current, accurate and hopefully have guides/tutorials
- SDKs/samples in preferred languages
- Free/freemium use
- Instant API keys
- Sandboxes
