# 05. GraphQL

## RESTful API Limitations

Endpoints are often designed to match a client. But clients get updated endpoints may not; this may lead to over-fetching or under-fetching.

Over-fetching: download more data than you need. e.g. need list of usernames, but get list of users and all available fields

Under-fetching: download less data than you need. e.g. want information about friends; first fetch list of friend IDs, then make request to get user data about each friend.

## GraphQL

A specification for how you specify data (c.f. strong typing) and how you query it.

Example:

```js
type TypeName {
  nonNullString: String!,
  nullArray: [String]
}

// String is a *scalar* type; a base type
```

All GraphQL queries return a 200 response code (unless there is a network error). Errors are returned in user-defined fields.

GraphQL:

- Returns 200 for all queries (unless there is a network error). Errors are returned in user-defined fields
- Uses `GET`s and `POST`s; the former encodes the query in the URL query parameters while the latter encodes it in the body as JSON
- Is a language specification for *composing* queries to a server
- Still requires some pre-defined data/queries on the server-side (what is allowable etc.)

Queries are in a JSON-like structure e.g.

```json
{
  assets(10) {
    id,
    url,
    nestedObject: {
      prop1,
      prop2
    }
  }
}
```

## Automated Testing

Mocha and Chai

- Runs test files in order given to it by the filesystem
- Within each test, tests are independent and run asynchronously
- Can setup pre- and post- conditions with `before()`, `aftereach` etc.
- Call `done` at the end of a test
- Can test HTTP requests using Chai-HTTP
- Ensure erroneous queries are tested as well
