# 08. Communicating with Servers

## XHR/AJAX

Raw JS XMLHttpRequest` or abstraction (e.g. JQuery AJAX - Asynchronous JavaScript and XML requests).

```js
const req = new XMLHttpRequest();
req.addEventListener("load", (response) => ...
req.open("GET", "http://example.com");
req.send();
```

How are multiple requests handled? TODO UNCLEAR

Event loop pattern (concurrency) is used - instead of executing all processes at once, it does things one at a time and reacting to events that happen.

(Parallelism = doing lots of things at once; **concurrency** = **dealing** with lots of things at once)

Once the response is received, it is pushed to the event queue and if there is an opening in the JS call stack, the event handler is called.

## Fetch

Introduced 2017, supports promises/async.

```js
fetch("http://example/com")
.then(res => res.json())
.then(obj => console.log(obj))
.catch(err => console.log(err));
```

### CORS: Cross Origin Resource Sharing

By default, XHR requests can only be made to the same origin that the script is hosted on.

The *server* of the requested content can optionally allow send some headers to allow this, which the *browser* must support and enforce.

Origin: protocol (HTTP/HTTPS) + domain + port

Forbidden request-headers are those that cannot be modified by XHR. These include:

- `Proxy-*`
- `Sec-*`
- `Access-Control-Request-Headers`
- `Access-Control-Request-Method`
- `Origin`
- `Host`
- `Content-Length`
- `Cookie`
- `Cookie2`

Forbidden response-headers cannot be read by XHR:

- `Set-Cookie`
- `Set-Cookie2`

Before a XHR request is sent, the browser makes a **preflight** request using the HTTP `OPTIONS` method, to which the server should respond with some headers:

- `Access-Control-Allow-Origin`: origin that can request the resource. Can be `*`, although this disables cookies
- `Access-Control-Allow-Methods`: comma-separated list of allowed HTTP methods
- `Access-Control-Max-Age`: number of seconds the response of a preflight request can be cached
- `Access-Control-Allow-Credentials: true`: cookies sent if true
- `Access-Control-Allow-Headers`: request headers the JS can modify
  - Required if browser sends `Access-Control-Request-Headers` with the headers the JS is trying to modify
  - `Accept`, `Accept-Language`, `Content-Language`, and `Content-Type` are safe headers and always allowed
- `Access-Control-Expose-Headers`: response headers the JS can read
  - Safe headers: `Cache-Control`, `Content-Language`, `Content-Length`, `Content-Type`, `Expires`, `Last-Modified` and `Pragma`

An old workaround: JSON-P (JSON with padding). Request a `<script>` from another origin, then a function/variable defined in the script can be called.

## WebSockets

Persistent 2-way communication.

Client sends GET request to specific endpoint with a few headers (e.g. `Connection: Upgrade`, `Upgrade: websocket`, `Sec-WebSocket-Key`/`-Protocol`/`-Version`) to which the server response with a `101` (switching protocols) and a few more headers. After this handshake, it switches to using WebSocket.

Some NPM packages fallback to HTTP if it is not supported. With the `ws` package:

```js
const WebSocket = require("ws");
const ws = new WebSocket("ws://example.com/path");

ws.on("open", () => ws.send("A"));
ws.on("message", msg => console.log(msg));
```
